
Overduin and Kite presents an exhibition of new works by Haim Steinbach. Steinbach has often made works using items selected from the collections of both private individuals and public institutions. At the gallerys invitation, Steinbach visited Mike Kelleys home, offices, and studio to view his personal collections as well as items amassed over the years for use in his artworks.
In discussing his work, Haim Steinbach writes,
Points:
1. An object is defined by its relationship to another object(s). Meaning is generated through the play of objects; in how they are placed, acting on one another. The viewer is engaged to complete the story, to solve the riddle.
2. Objects function in our lives as forms of communication. An object is a story in itself and at the same time it is a vessel ready to receive any projection brought upon it by the subject/viewer.
3. Objects are employed as figures of speech. For example, the Kong rubber dog chew may be read as a marker of time, like a point at the end of a sentence, a comma, a semicolon, or an exclamation mark.
4. The choice of objects and their grouping reflects their typological affinities and metonymic relationships.
5. Some approaches of choice in the selection and arrangement of objects are:
(a)The object(s) that have been in the possession of the artist for some time may be put together with a newly found or bought object. With experience, personal, historical, social, intellectual etc. a connection may be made with an object already internalized and a newly arrived object at a moment of recognition. (For instance Mr. Peanut)
(b) An object or objects in the possession of another individual are put into a new play by the artist.
(c) A complete arrangement in the possession of an individual is lifted in its original order and re-framed in another format of presentation.
6. Found statements have already been objectified in the formation of their content, typeset and the spacing between letters, words and sentences. In this respect they too are objects and are taken as such. 
The exhibition will be accompanied by a book with text contributions by Mike Kelley and Lisa Lapinski.
Haim Steinbach is based in New York and San Diego where he is a Professor of Art at the University of California San Diego. His work has been widely exhibited nationally and internationally. Recent solo exhibitions include: Matrix, Berkeley Art Museum, University of California, Berkeley, 2005; Sonnabend Gallery, New York, 2005; Akira Ikeda Gallery, Taura, 2006; Akira Ikeda Gallery, Berlin, 2006; Vistamare, Benedetta Spalletti, Pescara, 2007; Galleria Lia Rumma, Milan, 2007; Sonnabend Gallery, New York, 2007; Galerie Laurent Godin, Paris, 2007; and Waddington Galleries, London, 2008.
Several monographs on the artists work have been published including: Osmosis: Ettore Spalleti &amp; Haim Steinbach, published by the Guggenheim Museum, New York; Haim Steinbach: North East South West published by Hatje Cantz; O% published by Museum moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig Vienna; Haim Steinbach published by Ritter Verlag; Haim Steinbach published by Castello di Rivoli and Edizione Charta Milan; and no rocks allowed published by Witte de With Center for Contemporary Art, Rotterdam.

