
Regen Projects is pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by German artist Wolfgang Tillmans. This will be the artists fifth solo show at the gallery. Showing concurrently in both gallery spaces, Tillmans will present a selection of video works at Regen Projects and a new installation of photographs at Regen Projects II.
Tillmans photographs are wide ranging from formal abstracts that play with color, light and the process of photography to intimate, candid images. Seemingly casual, his installations are characteristic of his unique and personal aesthetic. Tillmans will show a selection of large-scale photographs at Regen Projects II. Abney Park and dark peonies are striking black and white photographs which originated from a photocopy; the appropriation and enlargement results in a total flattening of the image. The texture of the photocopy creates a medium onto itself, ultimately breaking down the image to tiny dots of pigment.
Additionally Tillmans will show works from his ongoing Lighter series. In this body of work Tillmans plays with photographic processes to create abstract works of color and light. The works are often folded or creased giving the pieces a sculptural quality. Framed within a Plexiglas box, their sharp folds and wrinkles are accentuated, highlighting the works three-dimensional quality. Often vivid and vibrant in color the works play with the viewers perception of where flatness and form meet.
Each photograph Wolfgang Tillmans takes and prints is part of a collective, which provides
a framework for difference and dialogue. A gradually growing community of images is the dynamic repertoire from which various pictorial and symbolic alliances and juxtapositions form, disassemble, and reform in his installations and publications over time.
(Ault, Julie, The Subject is Exhibition (2008) Installation as Possibility in the Practice of Wolfgang Tillmans, in Wolfgang Tillmans: Lighter. Ostfildern, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 2008. p. 16)
At Regen Projects, Tillmans will show a selection of video works. These simple and poetic videos continue Tillmans exploration of the ephemeral. In Peas a pot of bright green peas boils then slowly cools, and in Wind of Change street musicians play the 1990 hit song of the same name in front of Berlins Europa Center, an iconic high-rise tower in West Berlin.
Wolfgang Tillmans lives and works in London and Berlin and was the winner of the Turner prize in 2000. Tillmans work has been the subject of numerous publications as well as museum exhibitions worldwide. A recent North American survey was organized by the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago and traveled to the Hammer Museum, the Hirshhorn Museum, and the Museo Tamayo in Mexico City. This year, Tillmans had a large-scale retrospective at the Hamburger Bahnhof in Berlin and this was accompanied by the extensive catalogue Lighter which documents many of Tillmans unique and site specific installations over the past two decades.

