
Four weeks after the successful opening of the Temporäre Kunsthalle Berlin with video installations by the artist Candice Breitz, the second part of Candice Breitz / Inner + Outer Space will open on November 28 with the world première of her most recent work, Him (1968-2008).
Candice Breitz / Inner + Outer Space
Part II 11/28 12/28/2008
Him (1968-2008) is the title of the new 7-channel installation that Breitz has been working on since 2005. The work is being shown for the first time in the Temporäre Kunsthalle Berlin. The new installation weaves together fragments of Jack Nicholson sampled out of 23 films made by the Hollywood actor over a period of 40 years, placing Nicholson in a kaleidoscopic and schizophrenic dialogue with himself, himself, himself and himself. The extreme visibility of celebrities like Nicholson entices us into feeling that we know them, when in fact their iconicity relies precisely on the impossibility of our ever getting to know them.
Formally, Him grows out of Breitzs earlier found-footage installations Mother and Father (2005), works composed of fragments of footage isolated from their original Hollywood movies. The stars of Father Tony Danza, Dustin Hoffman, Steve Martin, Harvey Keitel, Donald Sutherland, and Jon Voight contemplate the highs and lows of fatherhood in an emotionally charged discussion. This psychologically taut dialogue between at times authoritarian father figures, here isolated from the Hollywood dream factory, can be viewed for the first time in juxtaposition with Him. For Working Class Hero (A Portrait of John Lennon) (2006), Breitz invited 25 John Lennon fans to re-perform the forty-year-old Lennon album, Plastic Ono Band, such that their appropriation of Lennons music becomes a platform for their own personal identifications and reflections.
Together, the three works offer a probing exploration of the iconic masculinity that is at the heart of mainstream cinema and popular music, lending insight into various male role models that are on offer in the mainstream media, while probing the social fears and inner conflicts that shape this media masculinity.
Candice Breitz (*1972 in Johannesburg, South Africa) lives and works in Berlin. Her work has been shown in international museums and galleries of world renown. In recent years, she has had solo exhibitions at, among other venues, the Palais de Tokyo, Paris; the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk; Modern Art Oxford, and the Bawag Foundation, Vienna. Breitzs works are included in public and private collections such as the Hamburger Kunsthalle, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Le Fonds national dart contemporain (Fnac), the Sammlung Goetz, and Thyssen-Bornemisza Art Contemporary. Since 2007 she has been a professor of fine art at the Hochschule für Bildende Künste in Braunschweig.
Gerald Matt is the curator of the exhibition. Since 1996, he has been the director of the Kunsthalle Vienna and, since November 2007, a member of the Artistic Advisory Board of the Temporäre Kunsthalle Berlin. Matt has been a visiting professor at the Universität für Angewandte Kunst Vienna since 2007 and has curated numerous exhibitions at the Kunsthalle Vienna (e.g., Superstars, Hl. Sebastian, Raymond Pettibon, Mathew Barney, Chen Zhen, Traum&amp;Trauma).

