
Harris Lieberman is delighted to announce the first U.S. solo exhibition
of German artist Bernd Ribbeck. Ribbeck previously participated in Here
We Stand, Lost in Wonder, a two-person exhibition at the gallery with
Simon Dybbroe Møller.
Ribbeck’s small paintings and works on paper build intricate geometric
structures with nods to Modernist and ornamental design. Pairing non-
traditional artistic mediums like ballpoint pen and marker with acrylic
and varnish, Ribbeck introduces a bold, gestural energy to his paintings
on MDF. Additive and deductive processes are a central element of
Ribbeck’s paintings. His methodical building and sanding of layers give
his mandala-like forms a surprising luminosity, as vibrant marks in red,
purple and turquoise erode into the colored grounds hidden just beneath.
As in the work of visionary artist and healer Emma Kunz, these complex
formal systems evoke metaphysical and even spiritual valences.
In his drawings, Ribbeck works India ink onto wet paper, continuously
soaking his surfaces to produce beautifully stained images. Originally
wrought in brilliant reds, yellows and blues, the interlocking ovals,
almonds and diamonds of the artist’s drawings dissipate into faded washes,
though this process, coming to resemble mystical icons and art-historical
relics. Vocabularies of drawing and painting enter both of Ribbeck’s
bodies of work, and the interplay of color fields and systematic mark-
making suggest new delineations for each medium, built upon Ribbeck’s
thoughtful reappraisal of the legacy of geometric abstraction, as well as
his arresting visual style.
Bernd Ribbeck was born in 1974 in Cologne. He graduated from the
Kunstakademie Düsseldorf and currently lives and works in Berlin. In
2009, Ribbeck had a solo exhibition at Kunstverein Oldenberg and
participated in Cave Paintings, curated by Bob Nickas, at PSM, Berlin;
Slow Paintings, Museum Morsbroich, Leverkusen; and The Long Dark, curated
by Michelle Cotton as part of The International 3, Manchester. His work
has been exhibited in Manifesta, Trentino, Bonner Kunstverein, Bielefelder
Kunstverein and the Kunsthalle Düsseldorf. relics. Vocabu

