
Galerie Max Hetzler is pleased to announce an exhibition by Darren Almond
featuring photographs of his recent Fullmoon series.
Darren Almond works in a variety of media photography, film and installation to translate the abstract ideas of time, space and memory. Examining the symbolic and emotional potential of objects, places and situations, he produces works which have universal as well as personal resonances that regularly take him to distant places, as in his photographic series shot in Norilsk and Monchegorsk, former Gulags in Siberia.
In 2000, Almond began a series of colour photographs, known as the Fullmoons. The first of these, titled Fifteen Minute Moon, was an experiment: to see what would result from photographing a moonlit landscape using an extended time exposure. He shot his first Fullmoon photograph on a trip near the Montagne Sainte Victoire in France, which was inspiration for much of Cézannes last paintings. Almond continued the series by travelling to solitary sites that had inspired artists and writers such as Turner, Constable, Caspar David Friedrich and John Ruskin. By using only the moon as a source of light and an extensive exposure time, he creates meditative landscapes that bear a mysterious and lyrical atmosphere.
Almonds new Fullmoons capture in an indisputable yet uncanny beauty the Huang Shan region in the Anhui province of China. Almond was especially drawn to the Yellow Mountain range, also known as Xihai or Huang Shan, with its magnificent peaks and canyons as well as extraordinary natural sites of Chinese spiritualism. Often translated into traditional Chinese landscape painting which is generally called Shan Shui, or mountain and water Huang Shan was first depicted in 1646 by Jiang Tao, who became later the Zen monk Hongren. After travelling extensively in southern China, Hongren was most impressed by the isolated Yellow Mountain area. He developed a unique style of landscape with his sharp and angular brushstrokes.
Almond travels to remote locations that reveal an emptiness of the human spirit while challenging the sense of ones own isolation and insignificance. Removed from the bright-lights and clamor of the city, Almonds mystical landscapes with their notion of melancholy are not only shaped by the moonlight but also by the historical associations that surround them.
Photographs of this series are currently exhibited at Altermodern: Tate Triennial, Tate Britain, London.
sometimestill is Almonds fifth solo exhibition at Galerie Max Hetzler.

