
Richard Telles Fine Art is pleased to present the second solo exhibition of new work by Nathan Hylden in Los Angeles.
Hylden’s paintings have a basic efficiency and raw materiality. For this exhibition Hylden has created a new series of works on aluminum panels. The paintings are made up of alternating layers of gesso, acrylic paint and a screen- printed image of a blank canvas printed in four parts. The order of operations is changed in each work. In some cases, gesso, the traditional ground of painting, is the final layer of the painting. In addition to this, when spraying the white gesso, Hylden uses the works as tools for the production of other works in the series. Where the white drops off abruptly in one work it picks up on the edge of another, tying the works together in a way that each work stands on its own but also stands as an indexical link to the other works. Through the series notions of surface, image, and support are interwoven.
Hylden has also produced a series of works on paper that have been stacked together and cut with a pattern, then spread apart and spray-painted. The works are both implement for and result of their making. The effect of this is physically and perceptually a confluence of positive and negative form, both material and image. In light of this complex interplay of material and image the works in the exhibition exceed formal analysis.
In conjunction with this exhibition Hylden will also present an artist book that is the result of a yearlong process in which he used sheets of paper to block out parts of his paintings as he made them. For each painting he made from February 2008 to February 2009 Hylden placed four sheets of paper between the stencil and the canvas before painting. The result is a collection of works on paper that represents a piece of every painting from the last year. The book is a reproduction of the cumulated works on paper. Common to Hylden’s approach is an engagement with the subjective artistic process and the situation of the finished painting in time. The presentation of the book and the corresponding works on paper will in effect retroactively finish the paintings of the last year.
Nathan Hylden (*1978, Fergus Falls, Minnesota) lives and works in Los Angeles. He studied at the Art Center in Pasadena, California and as a guest student at the Städelschule in Frankfurt/Main. His works have been shown in several international group exhibitions as well as solo exhibitions at Richard Telles Fine Art, Los Angeles, Misako &amp; Rosen, Tokyo, Art: Concept, Paris, and Johann König, Berlin. 


