
Rowley Kennerk Gallery is proud to present the first solo exhibition in Chicago of the work of Josef Strau.
INIQITIES SUSPEND
For over two decades Strau has elaborated the position of the thinker maker. For a time, with Stephen Dillemuth, he made space with Friesenwall 120, a seminal project of Köln, early nineties for several years. He next after had Galerie Meerrettich, Berlin in a glass store front from two thousand to two thousand six.
Texts are made by Strau that make and come from clearings and openings. He has paintings and texts and lamps which prompt resonance and stories are as much a space as any.
At Rowley Kennerk Gallery Strau will present new paintings, the paintings enact the stories that made them and the story the is begotten by them. Also there is a table. And lamps which make the gallery into a different type and kind then it had been. One glances light onto an installation of Straus texts. And there are different fonts and languages and grammars which cannot help but shift the affect and create a more cautious, casual, quiet understanding.
And now the iniquities of an artists practice: Automatic drawing. Automatic writing. Using ones own subjective biographic history. Trying to do different things like being a gallerist, a critic, and an artist. Trying to be an architect. Making galleries inside the gallery. Going back and changing finished artworks. Taking the work of other artists and using it as a model, wanting to become ones own assistant (The A as one painting declares), ones own habits and artistic history is also here explored from within.
Once again there is a looking back. These pictures and poetry are reminders, of when they contributed to a previous place for thinking and feeling. Still, nobody can repeat.
Strau was born in Vienna, Austria and he currently lives and works in Berlin and New York. He has had solo exhibitions at the Stedlijk Museum, Amsterdam; the Malmö Konsthall, Malmö; Kunsthalle Zurich, Zurich, Greene Naftali, New York, Daniel Buchholz, Cologne; Dependence, Brussels; and Christian Nagel, Cologne. He has been in group exhibitions at Vilma Gold, London; Catherine Bastide, Brussels; Galerie Neu, Berlin; Secession, Vienna; Tomio Koyama, Tokyo; Portikus, Frankfurt; Air de Paris, Paris; White Columns, New York; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; American Fine Art, New York; and Pat Hearn, New York, Manifesta 7, Frankfurt; and the Prague Biennial, Prague.
His essays have appeared in Texte zur Kunst, Parkett, ArtForum International and in numerous exhibition catalogues.

