
Ei Arakawa “Liaison, a Naïve Pacifist”
I went on a cruise around the world in 1996. I recall that I was a naïve pacifist.
For this show, I will do several performances with the friends and acquaintances I met on that cruise. We will reenact my past performances for two or three days before the opening (my performance is usually involved with a group of people). These will be private performances, but there will be editions of posters for these events. Most of these friends have never seen my work. These will not be perfect reenactments. We will use the gallery’s stairs, storage, and lift as stages. Someone will photograph these reenactments, and I will print them out on large sheets of paper, black and white. These photocopies might be used to cover up the floor. In the video gallery, I will project a video of elements from these reenactments, such as the various structures which result.
I was rallying outside when the Japanese embassy in Peru was being occupied by MRTA (Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement).
At first, this show will appear as a retrospective, then as all new work. These work completed in two or three days are affected by the accumulation of several years.
I am a liaison.
(NOTE: not between MRTA and outside)
I wonder if I can borrow Silke’s paintings? Instead of a big performance at the opening, I could do an announcement performance with Sam for 10 min or so. We may need a copy machine. This series of reenactments is almost a world circumscribed.
Liaison, a Naïve Pacifist (Or, perhaps a cruise).
All Past Performances, Any Performance: Eurovision2006 as Reconstruction Mood: The stair, Togawa Fan Club: moving boxes, Metropolis: paper panel, Two Grahams: fences, Kissing the Canvas: tapes and coatrack, On Kawara’s Esperanto: fake paintings, Riot 8 Bars: moving bar, Toward a Standard Risk Architecture: a structure in front of the store, Non-solo show, Non-group show: metal basket, BYOF: painting structure, TCCA magazine: magazines, The Club in the Shadow performance, Mid-Yuming as Reconstruction Mood, The Poetry Project performance, Patti’s New Mantra, Grand Openings, performance for The Metal Magazine, 1979 Pink Floyd as Reconstruction Mood, RIOT THE BAR, Azimi Book, “ghost/fantasma”, Egypted, Friendships, Outsides, homelessness, YUMING CITIES, The Color Ball, Ouroboros, LTTR street performance, Performance at the Web …

