
The hours between 4 am and 7 am have provided Kathy Prendergast with the creative context for her latest exhibition. An artist who generates a compelling narrative through the very real processes of her work, the mysterious quality of the very particular light just before dawn has provided the departure point for exploring the artistic possibilities of this intermediary space.
The central themes of Prendergasts work; longing, belonging, identity and the meaning of place continue to take centre stage. Included are a new series of large map drawings that develop the artists ongoing project of creating an emotional Atlas of the World. With obsessive attention to detail, Prendergast has transformed generic maps of Europe into magical views of a night sky where towns and cities become complicated constellations of planets and stars. Accompanying these are a number of enigmatic, hand painted bronze sculptures that transform everyday objects, such as a hearthrug or a coffee table, into poignant works of love, memory and loss.
In 1995, Prendergast was awarded the Premio 2000 for the best young artist at the Venice Biennale. A section of her monumental project The City Drawings, comprising several hundred tiny delicate drawings of the street plans of the worlds capital cities, was shown first at Venice and subsequently at the Tate Gallery, London. A larger section again was exhibited in Prendergasts 1999 solo exhibition at the Irish Museum of Modern Art, which has since acquired the work in its entirety for its permanent collection. In recent years Prendergast has exhibited widely in various venues including Sydney Biennale, the ICA, Boston, the Drawing Center, New York and 0044, an exhibition which toured PS1, New York, Albright-Knox Gallery, Buffalo in 1999/2000.
Prendergast is represented in the collections of the Tate Modern, London, CAS, UK, Arts Council of England, Arts Council of Ireland , Cheekwood Museum of Art, Nashville, Albright-Knox Museum, Buffalo Contemporary Museum, Honolulu, and Hugh Lane Municipal gallery, Dublin and numerous private collections in Ireland, Great Britain, Europe and USA.

