
We are pleased to be welcoming sculptor Gereon Krebber for a second solo exhibition in our gallery space. Gereon Krebber (who was born in 1973 and lives and works in Cologne) is showing new works with the intriguingly name of “Let the Pigs Pay”.
See for yourself how the artist treats the pigs this time: The front room is hung with mobiles that turn agilely in the air. These consist of dried pigs’ feet and ears that appear to be floating in space. The artist has given them a gold patina, hung them on poles, and counterbalanced them with concrete weights. The ensemble seems bizarre and ludicrous: Dark, slightly threatening, and surprisingly vivid, the finely-balanced poles bump into each other, the ears riveted with eyelets, the balance maintained with angler lead. The bodiless pigs rotate in the airspace of the gallery between strange revolution trophies and kabobs of doggy treats. The other rooms of the gallery also exude a world’s end atmosphere. It smells like something has been burning here: Jutting into the one room is an all-but-collapsed and charred sculptural ruins of what perhaps used to be part of a hut or a stall. Holes have burned through the planks, and a shopping cart converted into a feed trough has been fastened to the wall – and now holds fingerlike pigtails.
The viewer who has not yet had enough now stumbles into the back room, having passed over a greenish bowl containing entrails – luckily, these are made of acrylic resin. Arriving at the gallerist’s desk, it is now also possible to pay, since here is where Gereon Krebber is presenting his new catalogue “Sorrysorrysosorry”, hot off the press for the exhibition, edited by the Museum Goch and published by Kerber Verlag in Bielefeld. 120 pages in length, the book shows Krebber’s works from over the past two years in diverse solo exhibitions such as the Kunsthaus Essen, the Kunstverein Leverkusen, the Pawnshop Gallery in Los Angeles, and in group exhibitions such as the Lustwarande 08 in the Dutch city of Tilburg. The catalogue received generous support from the Kunststiftung NRW. On occasion of the exhibition there will be an edition available.

