
The Galerie Chantal Crousel is pleased to present the American artist Sean Snyder for a third
monographic exposure to Paris. A selection of recent works disintegrates the image by interrogating the
media and ideological representation and questioning the material aspect of information.
The installation in the main gallery space elaborates on the project titled ‘Index recently presented at the
ICA, London. The various works consist of a series of experiments made by the artist in the process of
digitizing and destroying his archive, in which the materials themselves become the subject of
investigation. Included is documentation of the physical storage matter such as printed matter, scratched
CDs and DVDs, celluloid, and disassembled electronics. A series of larger format works is based on the
mistakes and corruption of data encountered in the transfer between imaging formats. The various works
on display outline the process by which the material of the archive were catalogued and destroyed. Using
various imaging techniques including microphotography Snyder attempts to identify the underlying
decision making process and vocabulary used working with images and their ideological construct.
Exhibition is a video about art, its reception and the discourse it generates as well as the work involved in
the production of exhibitions. Exhibition reflects the rituals and conventions of the social dimension of art
and the failure of educational projects based on assumptions of the universal aesthetic experience. The
video uses as a subject the Soviet documentary film Noble Impulses of Soul, 1965, by Israel Goldstein. In
typical 1960s Soviet style, the pedagogical tone of the films narrative praises the efforts of a provincial
museum in the village of Parkhomivka in Eastern Ukraine revolving around an exhibition of
contemporary Mexican art presented at the museum and an art history lecture at a village farm. The
reprocessed video restructures the primary components, eliminates the voice of the narrator, and reorders
the chronology of the film to break the continuous realistic world of documentary and alluding to the
standardized and meaningless language that talks through people.

