
Opening on Thursday, June 25, Miguel Abreu Gallery is pleased to present The Bakery of Blok and the Three Forms of Unit, Zin Taylor’s first one-person exhibition at the gallery.
Zin Taylor continues to explore the development of form as a densely layered process akin to organic growth. In this exhibition he presents an integrated group of works comprised of wood sculptures, photographs and a single channel video, all linked through the culturally potent metaphor of bread making – a process involving basic elements, activating agents, chemistry and time. Taylors generating elements, the daily consideration of pieces of bread and a group of abandoned blocks of wood found in his Brussels studio, are set in a narrative of transformation in which they become tools for populating their environment with other forms.
Each of the repeated fifteen sculptural items arranged atop various cubes in the show is the result of a linguistic translation of text into form. “In researching bread production, Taylor states, I came upon instructions and lists for a necessary series of implements needed to make bread. Illustrations showing the appropriate items were routinely absent. As a programmatic working rule, I did not seek out visual references for each tool. Instead, I set about producing sculptural translations of each item as I interpreted it. The knife, spoon, scraper, tray, weights, scale, and containers represent what I have versioned as a depiction of the written item. Each item records my use of a constructed language, a fashioning of material into form.”
It can also be said that form here is the result of a self-reproducing character in a suggested plot where pieces of dough, for instance, re-animate into living beings. As in earlier works, such as his 2007 video Put Your Eye in Your Mouth: A Conversational Documentary Recording Martin Kippenbergers Metro-Net Station in Dawson City, Yukon, Taylor appropriates popular media formats. The Bakery of Blok and the Three Forms of Unit may be seen as an audience testing pilot mechanism, like those used for proposed television series, including a partial set, some short clips along with promotional posters. By repurposing familiar narrative modes, Taylors ensemble mimics the larger processes of history involving memory and forgetfulness. These works are playful, yet embedded with traces of their making accrued across several media.
Operating as a kind of sequel or elaboration upon a previous production, The Bakery of Blok and the Three Forms of Unit follows The Bakery of Blok exhibition held earlier this year in Toronto at Jessica Bradley Art + Projects.
Zin Taylor currently lives in Brussels where his work was seen in 2008 in The Crystal Ship BELvue Museum / Etablissement den Face Projects. In 2007 he had solo exhibitions at Galerie Isabella Bortolozzi, Berlin, Etablissement den Face Projects, Brussels, YYZ Artist-Outlet, Toronto and Presentation House, Vancouver. Taylors work has also been featured in Soundtracks: Re-Play, organized by the Blackwood Gallery, Mississaug, 2003, and the Edmonton Art Gallery; What the Worlds Like with The Words We Like at Catriona Jeffries Gallery, Vancouver, 2004 and Dedicated to you but you werent listening, curated Reid Schier at The Power Plant, Toronto, 2005.

