
On her first solo exhibition at Cristina Guerra Contemporary Art Gallery, Lisbon, Angela Bulloch (born 1966 in Rainy River, Ontario, Canada) will present a series of works under the title “Trajectories &amp; Other Lines”. The title refers not to a specific theme that is developed within the exhibition, or a particular group of works but to the nature of the works themselves. All of them have in common a process-based methodology as well as an internal narrative, which is made tangible either through embodying a certain trajectory or an evolution of some kind. These works carry on Bulloch’s investigations into the structures that organize our environments as well as our behaviors as a society. Z.ara.3:4 a new collaboration between Angela Bulloch and Michael Iber, following the working process and the formation of the Z Phrase piece (first shown in 2008 at the Städtische Galerie im Lenbachhaus und Kunstbau, München), will be presented at the exhibition. This work’s title Z.ara.3:4 refers both to the work that it references, as well to the processes that were used to achieve the new work a blurring, stretching and very selective editing of one music in order to create another.
Another new work presented at the show will be a new piece from The Rules Series: The Basic State, 2009. “The Basic State” is an online open source research project with a philosophical and cosmological take on the understanding of the nature of existence. The Rules Series consists of a listing of instructions and regulations, which come from very different spheres of social interaction. By shifting their original context, Bulloch is able to present an unusual insight to the social structures that rule our daily lives. This Rules Series piece will continue to grow, with more lines being added, as the research project continues to develop.
Also included in the exhibition will be two new Electric Wire Drawings: V. Point (red, wall to wall to wall) and F. S. Untitled (cyan, wall to floor). These are sculptural drawings made of electroluminiscient wire. The first one will outline the height and eve level of a specific person, while the second one will make reference to a specific work by the American minimalist sculpture Fred Sandback. By offering to the viewer only the outline of the form, by defining merely the edges of the virtual shape, the artist creates the illusion of solid volumes and it is the viewers’ perception that will have to imagine the rest of the form.
Finally, a work from the Night Skies Series, Night Sky: Alioth.4 as well as Last Year Again, 2008 will also be exhibited. The first work shows selected elements of a virtual night sky as seen from a point of view far away from the earth and reflects upon the impossibility of a single viewpoint of the order of the universe while the second consists of a double animated video projection using images of the earth taken by NASA satellites, as seen from space. The images have been manipulated, for example the weather has been removed in order to create a familiar icon but at the same time inaccessible to most of us, therefore existing only on the plane of the imagination, more real than reality.
Angela Bulloch has been nominated for the Turner Prize in 1997. She participated in the “Freeze” exhibition in London docklands in 1988 after completing her studies at Goldsmiths College University of London. Since then she has exhibited widely from the Guggenheim in New York to The Power Plant, Toronto, the Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, the Secession Wien, Vienna, the Palais de Tokyo, Paris, the ICA, Philadelphia and the Serpentine Gallery, London to name but a few. She has participated in the Venice Biennial, the Shanghai Biennial, the Lyon Biennial and the Valencia Biennial.

