
Galerie Max Hetzler is pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Ulrich Lamsfuß.
The Berlin-based artist Ulrich Lamsfuß reproduces in his paintings images found in a wide variety of media such as National Geographic, travel and fashion magazines, cinema or art related publications.
Working his way across a feint pencil grid with a meticulous precision, his paintings contrast the sources on which they are based, momentary snapshots captured in a fraction of a second. The glossy photographic surface is replaced by a sensuous painted structure that stresses the contrasts, thus creating a theatrical atmosphere.
Lamsfuß occasionally creates his own imagery by staging the picture, as for Holger Niehaus/Ulrich Lamsfuß, Fließbandarbeiterin (Sophie Rois), 2008 and Holger Niehaus/Ulrich Lamsfuß, Bergmann (Marc Hosemann), 2008, which depict Berlin-based actors Sophie Rois or Marc Hosemann posing as GDR workers in their professional surroundings referring to socialist realism.
The artist also underlines his interest in the process of reproduction through his chosen media, painting, by duplicating several times the exact same subject as Leni Riefenstahl, Die Nuba. Nuba-Mädchen 1 (braun), 2007 or De Tienda (Kalender Das Meer, Juni 2008, Edition Maritim) #2, 2008 of which he offers a number of versions.
Ulrich Lamsfuß new work continues to explore and question the principles of reproduction and authorship: I am once again the author, but in a more complex, more broken-up, more multi-dimensional way.
Ulrich Lamsfuß was born in 1971 in Bonn. He lives and works in Berlin.
spielen &amp; wachsen is his fourth solo-exhibition at Galerie Max Hetzler.
His solo exhibitions include: Gläserne Bienen at Galerie Daniel Templon, Paris (2007); PetSounds, a simultaneous exhibition at Lombard-Freid Fine Arts, New York and Daniel Hug Gallery, Los Angeles (2005). He has also participated in the following group exhibitions: Ad Absurdum, MARTa, Herford (2008); jetzt,beck &amp; eggeling, Düsseldorf (2007); Carbonic Anhydride, Galerie Max Hetzler, Berlin (2006); European Painting Award, Frissiras Museum, Athens (2005); Rückkehr ins All, Hamburger Kunsthalle, Hamburg and The Peripheries become the enter, Prague Biennale 1, Prague (2003).

