
Galerie Max Hetzler is pleased to present an exhibition featuring five new paintings by André Butzer at Zimmerstraße 90/91 on the occasion of the Gallery Weekend Berlin.
André Butzer developed his own form of expression by reacting to the non-figurative paintings by Albert Oehlen, the colour range of Edvard Munch and Asger Jorns dense and bright compositions. Influenced by German Expressionism, André Butzer shaped a style of intense colours, which produce an artificially exaggerated reality with overreaching and sometimes apparently grotesque forms. His work equally shows figurative elements which are often referring to comic-like figures.
On view will be large-scale paintings which display bright colourful lines and patterns on a grey background. In this recent series of grey paintings graphical elements appear such as dots, spirals and geometrical forms. The background surface is no longer saturated with thick layers of paint. Only graphical strokes of coloured lines are running in angular forms parallel to the edges. The composition is truly different from the colour paintings. Fewer motifs are depicted and the resulting effect represents a crucial contrast between the two series.
A significant aspect of André Butzers work, which he calls „science-fiction-expressionism is the repetition. The repetition is the core topic of his paintings that he approaches through variations, always referring to the same origin: „Paintings do not come into being one to one, but one to twenty; they cannot be fixed in a single outline, colour and function, but are constantly produced afresh by the observation and movement of these elements.*
This is André Butzers fourths solo exhibition at Galerie Max Hetzler.
André Butzer, born in 1973, lives and works in Rangsdorf near Berlin. The Kunsthalle Nürnberg will be presenting a solo exhibition by André Butzer starting in June 2009. Solo shows include Kunstverein Heilbronn (2004). He has participated in numerous group exhibtions including Oldenburger Kunstverein, MUMOK, Vienna, ZKM Museum für Kunst und Medientechnologie, Karlsruhe, Kestnergesellschaft, Hanover (all in 2008); Rubell Family Collection, Miami (2007); Collection Goetz, Munich (2006); Museum der Moderne Salzburg, Carré dart Musée dart contemporain de Nîmes, Museum am Ostwall, Dortmund, Kunstverein Ulm (all in 2005); Kunsthalle Hamburg, Kunstverein Graz, Kunstverein Frankfurt (all in 2003) and Kunsthalle Baden-Baden (2002).
A second solo exhibition by André Butzer is on view during the Gallery Weekend Berlin at Galerie Guido Baudach in Berlin-Wedding, Oudenarder Straße 16-20.

