
Elad Lassry means the photo as a mere instrument subservient to the will of the artist, eliminating at a stroke the dialectic between media and message. With a prodigious technique, Lassry reproduces in detail, almost maniacal, animals, objects, places and persons whose enhances the brightness of colors, lights and shadows, in a perfect balance of form and composition. The choice of the frame plays a crucial role and reveals the magic combination of content and container, meaning and significance.
The works of Elad Lassry are positioned at an angle with respect to usability issues, perception and aesthetics of the image today, revaluing the analogical thinking, and thus introducing new uses and other uses. Lassry reconstructed in the studio, through a meticulous composition, a meta-reality where the subjects are presented as abstractions, and where the image can be regarded as incidental decoration parts such as shadows, colors, tones, lights. Sometimes the artist acquires images directly from publications or photo archives, and excluding some details on these acts and relocated in the best tradition of artifice (as in, for example, the series dedicated to Anthony Perkins, a renowned American actor who died in September 1992, in which even the actor originally portrait is omitted) or covering faces and bodies with thin strips of aluminum foil colors.
In the film Untitled (Passacaglia) Elad Lassry continues his research on image and cultural references in contemporary society. The artist draws inspiration from a television documentary of 1966 focused on the choreography Passacaglia, originating in 1938, Doris Humphrey, a key figures in the history of modern dance. As in the photographic work, even in the 15-minute film, shot in Super 16 mm format, nothing is left to chance: the clothes of the dancers of the New York City Ballet, the work serves as background, inspired by Portuguese Tall Woman of 1916 Robert Delaunay, positioning and movements of the camera, the poses and steps of the choreography, the lack of audio focus attention not so much on individual elements represented but the nature of visual perception and the relationship that develops between the person who sees and the object being seen
Elad Lassry was born in Tel Aviv in 1977. He lives and works in Los Angeles. Among the shows we remember that at the Kunsthalle Zurich (2010), the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (2009) and at the Art Institute of Chicago (2008). He has participated in numerous group exhibitions including The Reach of Realism at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Miami (2009), Dance with room at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia (2009) and The Generational: Younger Than Jesus, at the New Museum of New York (2008).

