
Renwick Gallery is please to present the group exhibition
the same sight slighter,
The exhibition will have an opening reception on April 10th from 6 to
8pm.
The title comes from Gertude Stein’s masterful 1914 prose poem Tender 
Buttons. The poem is an inventoried description of things both
transcendental and trivial. Counted among the subjects of Tender 
Buttons are A SUBSTANCE IN A CUSHION; END OF SUMMER; A BLUE COAT; 
NOTHING ELEGANT; ORANGE; and A FEATHER. Stein’s linguistic account of
these things is so careful, vivid and charming, that on occasion the
referent even slips from mind and the words become their own rolling
landscape.
the same sight slighter, explores rhymes between gesture and object. A
color is compared with the shape of a string. The grace of a falling
flower petal is contrasted with the texture of a brushstroke. One gets
a sense of things.

Bianca Beck lives and works in New York. Beck has recently been in exhibitions at Galeria Marta Cervera, Madrid; Cave Gallery in Detroit; Alogon Gallery in Chicago; Emily Harvey Foundation in New York; and Shane Campbell Gallery in Chicago.
Alexandra Bircken lives and works in Cologne. A survey of her work will open at the Kölnischer Kunstverein in April. Bircken has had solo exhibitions at Herald St in London; BQ in Berlin; Ursula Blickle Stiftung in Germany; the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam; and Barbara Gladstone Gallery in New York. She had recently been in group exhibitions at the Henry Moore Institute in Leeds; Museum Boijmans van Beunigen in Rotterdam; Barbican Art Gallery in London; New Museum in New York; and Kunstverein Braunschwig in Germany.
Heather Guertin lives and works in New York. She received an MFA from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago in 2008. Guertin has recently exhibited at Rowley Kennerk Gallery in Chicago, the Emily Harvey Foundation in New York; Swingr Space in Vienna; 65 Grand in Chicago; Bell Street Projects in Vienna; the Dark Fair at the Swiss Institute in New York; New York City Gallery in Chicago; and the Milwaukee International Art Fair in Wisconsin.
Charlotte Posenenske lived and worked in Germany and died in Frankfurt am Main in 1985. A
survey of her work is currently at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris. There have recently been solo exhibitions of her work at Peter Freeman, Inc. in New York; Galerie Mehdi Chouakri in Berlin; Between Bridges in London; and Galerie im Taxispalais in Innsbruck. Her work has recently been featured in group exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art in New York; Johann Koenig in Berlin; Documenta 12 in Kassel; the Museum Moderner Kunst, Stiftung Ludwig in Vienna; Harvard University in Cambridge; Generali Foundation in Vienna; and the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt am Main.
Clément Rodzielski lives and works in Paris. He has had recent solo exhibitions at Galerie Carlos Cardenas in Paris; Chert in Berlin; Module du Palais de Tokyo in Paris; and Federico Bianchi in Italy. He has been in group exhibitions at Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac in Paris; Air de Paris; Centre Pompidou in Paris; Fondation Ricard in Paris; Centre d’art Contemporain in Pougues les Eaux; MAC in Marseille; Ellen de Bruijne projects in Amsterdam; and Musée des Abattoirs in Toulouse.
Josh Tonsfeldt lives and works in New York. He received an MFA from Columbia University in New York in 2007. Tonsfeldt currently has a solo exhibition at Franco Soffiantino Gallery in Turin. He recently had a solo exhibition at Simon Preston Gallery in New York and has been in group exhibitions at the Kitchen in New York; Presentation House Gallery in Vancouver; White Space Gallery in London; Evas Arche at Gavin Brown’s Enterprise in New York; CRG Gallery in New York; Oliver Kamm Gallery in New York; Orchard 47 in New York and Artists Space in New York.
B. Wurtz lives and works in New York City. Wurtz has had solo exhibitions at Feature Inc. in New York; Richard Telles Fine Art in Los Angeles; 871 Fine Arts in San Francisco; the Suburban in Oak Park; Gallery 400 at the University of Illinois in Chicago; Salle de Bains in Rotterdam; and Spak in Sweden. He has recently been in group exhibitions at Castillo/Corrales in Paris; Galerie Steinek in Vienna; Musée d’Art Contemporain de Lyon in France; Presentation House Gallery in Vancouver; Journal Gallery in Brooklyn; Japanese American National Museum in Los Angeles; Herald St in London; Andrea Rosen in New York; Musée d’Art Moderne Grand-Duc Jean in Luxembourg; Barbara Gladstone Gallery in New York; Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York; Musee d’Orsay in Paris and PS1 in Long Island City.

From Gertrude Stein’s Tender Buttons
If comparing a piece that is a size that is recognised as not a size
but a
piece, comparing a piece with what is not recognised but what is used
as it
is held by holding, comparing these two comes to be repeated. Suppose
they
are put together, suppose that there is an interruption, supposing that
beginning again they are not changed as to position, suppose all this
and
suppose that any five two of whom are not separating, suppose that five
are
not consumed. Is there an exchange, is there a resemblance to the sky
which
is admitted to be there and stars which can be seen. Is there. That was
a
question. There was no certainty.

