
Andersen’s Contemporary is proud to present Half Snowball, a multi-media work-in-progress installation created jointly by Peter Bonde (1958 -) and Jason Rhoades (1965-2006)
Half Snowball is a deafening total installation composed of racing cars, monitors showing film footage from car racing, photographs, paintings, tires, sponsor banners, stickers and thousands of other elements and objects from the racetrack and the race environment.
The background for the installation is the fact that Peter Bonde and Jason Rhoades both passionate racecar enthusiasts set up and filmed a series of races with half scale NASCAR style cars racing on the Willow Springs “Paved Oval” Track, in the desert north of Los Angeles. The event took place in March 1999 and established what was called, “racing forums”, in which other artists, critics, curators, filmmakers along with sponsors of the project and innocent bystanders were encouraged to participate in an ongoing discussion using wireless tcommunication while driving the cars.
The project was originally named Snowball and was commissioned by the Arts Council for the Danish Pavilion at the 48th Venice Biennale in 1999. Snowball is from the beginning intended to be a work-in-progress: like a rolling snowball, its force and intensity increases continuously as new people and elements encounter the project and contribute to the discussion.
After the first presentation at the Venice Biennale, the Snowball rolled on to other institutions: The National Gallery of Denmark in Copenhagen and Kunsthalle Göppingen, Germany. Each time the project has been shown in new forms with new additions. And in this case also, unfortunately, new omissions: Jason Rhoades died suddenly in 2006 and Peter Bonde, stands alone with the continuation of the rolling snowball. The current presentation, which, incidentally, is the first in a commecial gallery has thus been given the title Half Snowball. The joint artwork is intact, but one half is missing.
Peter Bonde graduated from the Royal Danish Academy of Art (1976-82). He was professor at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts (painting) from 1996 to 2005. Since the 1980s, Bonde participated in numer- ous solo and group exhibitions in and outside Denmark. Bonde is represented in a number of Danish art museums: ARoS, Esbjerg Kunstmuseum, Horsens Kunstmuseum, Kastrupgaard Collection,The National Gallery of Denmark, Køge Art Museum, Art Museum Trapholt, National Gallery of Art and West Zealand Art Museum. He is also represented in the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, Germany, and in the private collection Axa Northern Stern, Köln, Germany.

