
Keren Cytter makes films that portray characters entangled in complicated relationships, simultaneously connected and alienated from one another. Inspired by direct experiences and observations of her surroundings as well as the films, plays, and novels of such luminaries as Alfred Hitchcock, John Cassavetes, Roman Polanski, Jack Smith, Jorge Luis Borges, Tennessee Williams, and Samuel Beckett and mainstays of popular culture like soap operas and science fiction, her work is carefully scripted and produced while maintaining a sense of spontaneity and unpredictability. While several of her videos were shot in her apartment in Berlin using either professional actors or a cast of friends and acquaintances— including two works that will be on view, Les Ruissellements Du Diable [The Devils Stream] (2008) and Four Seasons (2009)—her untitled work for last summer’s Venice Biennale, also included in the show, was filmed with professional adult actors and untrained children on a stage with a live audience.
Les Ruissellements Du Diable [The Devils Stream] takes the short story by Argentinean author Julio Corta?zar, which provided the basic narrative structure for Michelangelo Antonioni’s iconic film Blow-Up, as its inspiration and examines questions of perception, memory, and documentary truth in photography. Four Seasons, in which two of Cytter’s acquaintances play the lead roles, is a melodrama with references to absurdist theater, surrealist narratives, and the fraught relationships at the heart of Tennessee Williams’ plays. Loosely structured on John Cassavetes’s film Opening Night, Cytter’s untitled work revolves around the life of an actress and explores notions of identity in relationship to role-playing. Cytter’s non-linear narratives, short scenes, repetition, and use of a hand-held camera create absurdly abstract sequences of highly dramatic interactions and events, infused with both humor and pathos.
Keren Cytter was born in Tel Aviv, Israel in 1977. She studied at The Avni Institute in Tel Aviv and at de Ateliers in Amsterdam before moving to Berlin, where she currently lives. Cytter’s work has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions at venues including Tate Modern Turbine Hall, London; X Initiative, New York; Witte de With Center for Contemporary Art, Rotterdam; Museum Moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig, Vienna; KW Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; and Kunsthalle Zu?rich, Zu?rich. Her work has been included in thematic exhibitions including Faro Mondi / Making Worlds at the 53rd International Art Exhibition, La Bienniale de Venezia, Venice; Television Delivers People, Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Manifesta 7, Trentino; and Talking Pictures, K21 Kunstammlung Nordhein-Westfalen, Du?sseldorf. Most recently, Cytter created her first theatrical performance, History in the Making or The Secret Diaries of Linda Schultz, performed at the Tate Modern and at The Kitchen in NYC as part of Performa 09.
This exhibition is organized by Anne Ellegood, Hammer senior curator.

