
Renwick Gallery is proud to present a project by Pierre Leguillon and Clément Rodzielski, Teatrino/Palermo.
The exhibition will open on Friday November 19th, 2010 from 6-8 pm.
On the occasion there will be a short performance by Leguillon and Rodzielski at 7pm.
The exhibition will continue until Saturday January 8th, 2011.
With contributions from Martin Beck, Isabelle Cornaro, Moyra Davey, Jean-Luc Moulène, Conny Purtill and Ricardo Valentim.
First, Blinky Palermo made a painted puppet theater, For Iris Jasmin, in 1964, at the time he was still a student of Joseph Beuys at the Art Academy in Düsseldorf.
Then, Pierre Leguillon and Clément Rodzielski remade Teatrino/Palermo for a project at the Centre Pompidou, Paris in 2009. They invited guests and friends from various fields to make screenings, performances and other interventions which functioned as the events of the teatrino.
Now, they have remade the remake of Teatrino/Palermo for the people of New York.
Leguillon and Rodzielski have devised a specific staging for Teatrino/Palermo at Renwick Gallery, consisting of multiple wall paintings by both artists through out the gallery space. Some of the wall paintings perform as decorative backdrops for the teatrino and some function as textual captions for the various invited guests. Painting as scenery and painting as playbill, sometimes each as the other but always as a device.
The artists then invited Beck, Cornaro, Davey, Moulène, Purtill and Valentim to participate. These distinguished guests will include pictures, host lectures, screen films, make performances, stage situations and otherwise make things happen. The contributions and events will unfold and continue through out the duration of the exhibition. A full schedule of events will be published and distributed at the opening and available on the gallery website.
And of course there are always other elements to every exhibition.
Pierre Leguillon lives and works in Paris, and currently has a solo museum exhibition at Mamco, Geneva. His widely acclaimed recent project, Pierre Leguillon features Diane Arbus: A Printed Retrospective, 1960-1971, has been presented by the Kadist Art Foundation, Paris; the Moderna Museet, Malmo; the Centre Regional de la Photographie, Douchy-les Mines and will be presented in 2011 at De Hallen, Haarlem. Selected recent solo exhibitions, projects, presentations and performances have been held at Motive Gallery, Amsterdam; Musee du Lourve, Paris; Centre Pompidou, Paris; CAPC, Musee d’Art Contemporain, Bordeaux; Song Song, Vienna; Air de Paris, Paris; Artists Space, New York; Temple Gallery, Philadelphia; CNEAI, Chatou; Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Bordeaux; Secession, Vienna and elsewhere.
Clément Rodzielski lives and works in Paris, and recently had a solo exhibition at Sutton Lane, London. He has held recent solo exhibitions at Galerie Carlos Cardenas, Paris; Chert Gallery, Berlin; Module du Palais de Tokyo, Paris; Federico Bianchi Contemporary Art, Lecco. He has been in recent group exhibitions at Bielefelder Kunstverein, Bielefeld; Galerie Chantal Crousel; Paris; GAMeC, Bergame; Musee d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, Paris; Tate Modern, London; Castillo/Corrales, Paris; Doundation d’entreprise Ricard, Paris, Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac, Paris; Air de Paris, pAris’ Centre Pomidou, Paris, and elsewhere. His work was previously included in the group exhibition the same sight slighter at Renwick Gallery last spring.

