
Shane Campbell Gallery is pleased to announce a solo exhibition of new paintings by Mark Grotjahn. This will be Grotjahn’s first solo exhibition in Chicago and will consist of paintings from Grotjahn’s series of “face” paintings.
The history of 20th century Western art tends to orient itself in relation to two metanarratives: abstraction and self-expression. Grotjahn’s “butterfly” paintings represent a complicated relationship with the history of abstraction and monochrome painting as they contaminate the purity of the allover field through the language revealed in the excised areas of the surface. The signature, dates, and glimpses of the underpainting ground the work in the present consequently denying the transhistorical and transcultural properties assigned to monochrome painting. The “face” paintings, on the other hand, represent sublimated desire and extend an equally complicated relationship to the history of self-expression and primitivism. These works acknowledge a debt to Pablo Picasso and German Expressionism which manifest a crisis in subjectivity through the visual formation and deformation of the figure while simultaneously engaging the Postimpressionist practices of Paul Signac and Pierre Bonnard that tend to displace the subjectivity of the artist in favor of a fuzzy empirical attention to light, color, and structure.
Mark Grotjahn was born in 1968 and received his MFA from the University of California, Berkeley and his BFA from the University of Colorado, Boulder. He has been included in exhibitions at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Kunstmuseum Thun, Switzerland; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. His work is in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, the Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; and the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam. Mark Grotjahn lives and works in Los Angeles.

