
Giò Marconi gallery is pleased to present “Couleur et Fabrication”, the second solo show of American artist Wade Guyton.
The exhibition, which will be on display in the basement space of the gallery, presents a selection of 47 drawings that Guyton made in 2009.
In 2003 Guyton started to use a cheap printer to print images over pages torn from design, art and architecture magazines all dating from the 1920s to the 1980s, to produce “printer drawings”.
For this particular series of works Guyton tore images from an Italian lamp catalogue from the 1960s and marked the pages with differently coloured geometric lines.
He started this body of work by running these already-printed pages through a deskjob inkjet printer – thereby using his traditional ink jet printing technique he also employs for his large scale canvases.
For Guyton the action of drawing or painting is filtered through the intervention of the machine the printer which always significantly contributes to the final result.
Guyton dialogues directly with the book and the objects that populate its pages: the image is separated physically torn from the context and subsequently revised by the computer’s inserting of pure geometric elements that overlap and, at the same time, are juxtaposed to the subject. He creates a new figuration which is reminiscent of Russian Constructivism and the Bauhaus.
“Couleur et Fabrication” – are the two major elements in Guyton’s compositions. An artist’s book with photographs of the works in the exhibition will be published for the occasion.
 
Wade Guyton was born in 1972 in Hammond, Indiana. He lives and works in New York.
Over the years his works have been presented in many institutions in the United States and in Europe; he has had solo shows at the: Ludwig Museum, Cologne; the Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle; Portikus, Frankfurt; MAMbo, Bologna; Haubrokshows, Berlin; West London Projects, London; Harvard University, Massachusetts; The Kunstverein, Hamburg and La Salle de Bains, Lyon.

