
When can an independent art space feel it is old enough to revive its own history in the form of a retrospective exhibition? When is it right to think its record of activities deserves a historicizing publication? The answer is ten years. It is the convention that seems to apply here. Ten years is what distinguishes real proof of accomplishment from self- aggrandizing thinking.
Ten years. Let’s celebrate ten years of castillo/corrales then.
The Way It Wasn’t questions the ineluctable establishment of a once-considered-alternative organization. It addresses the illusion of coherence that such a day-by-day endeavor often gains in retrospect, as well as the overblown importance that a small, localized structure can take in the view from afar.
Celebrating ten years of trials of castillo/corrales in Minnesota means to show more than there actually is. The Way It Wasn’t draws from exhibitions and projects which did take place in the 29-square-meter Paris-based gallery, and from ones which almost did. Some were only discussed but got postponed. For others, it just wasn’t the right time.
The Way It Wasn’t combines some of the artworks, positions, and statements which have made castillo/corrales over all these years, including elements from Doomsday Celebration, Red Flags, Breaking Point: Kathryn Bigelow’s Life in Art, and the three biennial summer exhibitions titled Hello Goodbye Thank You, but also from projects such as 1992, The Robert Musil Show, Gaston in Mexico, Notorious CS Leigh, and from some of the many events held at castillo/corrales’ bookstore Section 7 Books.
Ten years: a partial history of the decade that is about to end, as seen through the life and times, the acts and words, the highs and lows of an independent art space in Paris. Let’s celebrate ten years of castillo/corrales, already.
Work by Lutz Bacher, Jay Chung &amp; Q Takeki Maeda, Leon Golub, Aaron Flint Jamison, Owen Land, CS Leigh, Nils Norman, Willem Oorebeek, Amy Sillman, Joe Scanlan, Sturtevant, Oscar Tuazon, and Heimo Zobernig.
A forthcoming companion book to the exhibition documents ten years of press releases for the exhibitions and events organized at castillo/corrales, Paris. It includes introductory essays by Michelle Grabner and Anthony Huberman. It will be published by Midway Contemporary Art, ART Press, Paraguay Press, and Culturgest Portugal, which is hosting the exhibition The Way It Wasn’t (Celebrating ten years of castillo/corrales, Paris) in February 2011.
castillo/corrales is a shared office space and collectively-run gallery initiated in early 2007 by a group of artists, curators, critics and writers. Members of castillo/corrales are: Thomas Boutoux, Laure Giletti, Boris Gobille, Guillaume Leblon, François Piron, Benjamin Thorel and Oscar Tuazon.
Project support provided by Etant donnés: The French-American Fund for Contemporary Art, a program of FACE.

