
We are pleased to announce our seventh solo exhibition with Jorge Pardo (born 1963), which opens on Friday, September 9th and will be on view from the 10th of September to the 8th of October, 2011.
At the center of the exhibition space, a six meter wide circular platform equipped with Pardos characteristic furniture sculptures completes paced rotations. Atop this spinning stage, two seating areas encourage the step from a fixed outside into a tuned interior. One grouping consists of two low lounge chairs with ottomans and a chaise lounge surrounding a circular glass topped table, all balanced on wooden legs. On the other side of the platform a long table accommodates six high backed chairs. Bright plastic cords wrapped and woven on the pieces hand-lacquered steel frames create suspended surfaces recalling beach hammocks on which one can comfortably relax.
Seen from the platform, the walls of the gallery temper the vista; six sun golden paintings cycle passed. The roughly six foot wide hand-painted canvases are evenly spaced along the gallerys four surrounding walls. Directly above the central platform hangs a large signature installation of light sculptures. The work is comprised of three repeating forms installed in clusters at variable heights, together creating a hovering cloud, whose light scatters throughout the space. The lamps hand-bent aluminum surfaces are smoothed in colors ranging from mustardy yellows, dense pinks and greens to saturated brown. From both the density of lights at the shows heart and the encircling paintings, where gold leaf and lustrous surfaces reflect and diffuse, a stralling light fills the space.
All the works revolve around the exhibition space, its walls, the room, the images, the viewer, a lot of circles and of course themselves.
Jorge Pardo, 2011
We would also like to draw your attention to the recent completion of a pivotal work by Jorge Pardo. Tecoh, a hacienda within the northern Yucatán in México, is the site of Pardos most recent and expansive Gesamtkunstwerk to date. The sites over twenty buildings, structures and Palapas, many of them incorporating the remaining ruins of the original hacienda from the nineteenth century, have been restructured, augmented, and fully furnished by Pardo in the Yucatán. To coincide with the opening of Tecoh this late fall, a book tracing the development of the project, including a series of interviews with the artist and an introduction by the art critic Alex Coles, will be published by Sternberg Press and made available through the gallery.
Works by Jorge Pardo were to be seen in solo exhibitions held within numerous institutions including, among others, the Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin (2010); K21, Düsseldorf (2009); the Museum of Contemporary Art, North Miami (2007); the Fundació la Caixa, Barcelona (2004); the Dia Art Foundation, New York (2003), and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (1998).

