
UNTITLED is elated to present a two person exhibition by Los Angeles artists Anthony Pearson and Jonas Wood.
Pearson and Wood work in seemingly divergent ways, the former having a heavily formatted and subdued non-representational practice born out of conceptual photography, the latter explosively employing painting and drawing in a deep articulation of personal narrative. But this differentiation rests at the surface as there are deep-rooted connections between them.
This exhibition reveals an artistic relationship that resonates on a level of mark making and line and in a pre-occupation with objects and the musicological. Both artists maintain a daily studio practice that generates an endless stream of drawings. This shared core concern with drawing acts as a platform for the development of all works. Both artists use drawing as a genesis and value the simplicity of line as much as the overarching presentation of their work.
Furthermore the works in the exhibition will present an interesting dialogue with the realm of design and decoration, both artists at once shunning and flirting with the precipice of the object as ornament. For these artists, the studio and the home are interchangeable spaces for dialogue and creation – with studios on the same block, and houses in the same neighborhood, a constant contact with each other fosters an exchange of ideas and sensibilities.
These shared sensibilities are fully realized on the occasion of this exhibition as both artists have worked closely to highlight commonalities by deftly curating a show of works that are in concert with each other.
Anthony Pearson was born in Los Angeles, California and received his MFA from UCLA in 1999. He has had solo exhibitions at Midway Contemporary Art, Minneapolis in 2008, Marianne Boesky Gallery, New York in 2009, Shane Campbell Gallery, Chicago in 2010 and David Kordansky Gallery, Los Angeles in 2010. In 2011 he will be featured in The Anxiety of Photography at the Aspen Art Museum.
Jonas Wood was born in Boston and received his MFA from the University of Washington in 2002. He has had solo exhibitions at Shane Campbell Gallery, Chicago in 2009, the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles in 2010 and Anton Kern Gallery, New York in 2011. Numerous group exhibitions include the Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus as well as Karma International, Zurich and Blum and Poe, Los Angeles.

