
Yesterday Is History, Tomorrow Is a Mystery, and Today Is a Gift
Opening Reception, 25 August 2011, 6pm
26 August 1 October 2011
Oogway: There are no accidents.
Oogway: My friend, the panda will never fulfill his destiny, nor you yours until you let go of the illusion of control.
Shifu: Illusion?
Oogway: Yes.
[points at peach tree]
Oogway: Look at this tree, Shifu: I cannot make it blossom when it suits me nor make it bear fruit before its time.
Shifu: But there are things we *can* control: I can control when the fruit will fall, I can control where to plant the seed: that is no illusion, Master!
Oogway: Ah, yes. But no matter what you do, that seed will grow to be a peach tree. You may wish for an apple or an orange, but you will get a peach.
Shifu: But a peach cannot defeat Tai Lung!
Oogway: Maybe it can, if you are willing to guide, to nurture it, to believe in it.
Shifu: But how? How? I need your help, master.
Oogway: No, you just need to believe. Promise me, Shifu, promise me you will believe.
Oogway: [walking towards Po] Ah! I see that you have found the Sacred Peach Tree of Heavenly Wisdom!
Po: [Po turns around with a lot of peaches stuffed in his mouth] Oh! Is that what this is? Im so sorry! I just thought it was a regular peach tree!
Shifu: But who? Who is worthy to be trusted with the secret to limitless power? To become the Dragon Warrior?
Oogway: I dont know.
Oogway: One often meets his destiny on the road he takes to avoid it.
Po: Maybe I should just quit and go back to making noodles.
Oogway: Quit, dont quit? Noodles, dont noodles? You are too concerned about what was and what will be.
There is a saying: yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, and today is a gift. That is why it is called the present.
Shifu: Master! I have its very bad news!
Oogway: Ah, Shifu. There is just news. There is no good or bad.
Shifu: Master, your vision. Your vision was right! Tai-Lung has broken out of prison! Hes on his way!
[pause]
Oogway: That IS bad news.
Po: What are you pointing at?
Oogway: The Dragon Warrior.
Tigress: Master, were you pointing at me?
Oogway: Him.
Po: Me?
[Moves around, Oogways finger follows him]
Oogway: You.
Po: What?
Oogway: [Raising Pos arm with his stick] The universe has brought us the Dragon Warrior!
Po: What?
Tigress, Crane, Monkey, Mantis, Viper: What?
Shifu: What?
Mr. Ping: What?
Oogway: My time has come.
[hands his staff to Shifu]
Shifu: What? What are you?
Oogway: You must now continue your journey without me.
Shifu: No! WAIT! You cannot leave me, Master!
Oogway: You must beleive
Shifu: MASTER!
[in a haze of peach blossoms, Oogway ascends to the heavens]
Oogway: There are no accidents.
Shifu: [sighs] Yes, I know. Youve already said that twice.
Oogway: That was no accident either.
Shifu: Thrice.

