
Altman Siegel is pleased to present a group show of conceptual sculpture by three exceptional young artists. The exhibition includes the work of Zarouhie Abdalian, Matt Sheridan Smith, and the collaborative team Keller/Kosmas (Aids 3-d). The works in this show are made from simple materials, which the artists use in subversive ways to make cogent political commentary on the state of current cultural issues including terrorism, environmentalism, and immanent catastrophe.
Zarouhie Abdalian’s work generally concentrates on ideas surrounding landscape, particularly unstable landscape in flux or in the state of collapse. Working fluidly between drawing, video, and installation, Abdalian investigates landscape as both the material site in which the viewer is located and as an index of the historical accumulation of images circumscribing the site itself. Using quotidian and minimal materials, she creates elegant sculptures and site specific installations.
Originally from New Orleans, Abdalian (b. 1982) lives and works in Oakland, CA and recently received her MFA from CCA. Her work has been exhibited in numerous group exhibitions, including Painted Over/Under: Part 2, curated by Jens Hoffmann, LACE, LA, and SC13, curated by Chris Fitzpatrick and Post Brothers at SFADM, San Francisco. Forthcoming exhibitions include Untitled (12 the Istanbul Biennial), 2011 curated by Adriano Pedrosa and Jens Hoffmann.
Matt Sheridan Smith manipulates a variety of mediums to address notions of authorship, originality, and value. Considering the precarious relationships between language and objects, Smith attempts to reveal the poetic effects of seemingly banal content or conventions. In a piece recently commissioned by the New York Public Art Fund, Smith created temporary inflatable sculptures representing the commodity futures traded on the New York Stock Exchange, wool, coffee, wheat, and canola seeds. This installation staged a playful allegory of the uncertainty of today’s financial system, and referenced our desire for valuation and control with an increasingly unpredictable future. Smith often creates temporary and fluid installations designed for the exchange of ideas between artist and viewer.
Matt Sheridan Smith (b. 1980) lives and works in New York City. His work has been exhibited in solo and group exhibitions at Lisa Cooley, NY, Sculpture Center, NY, The Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis, Western Bridge, Seattle, Karma International, Zurich, Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian, Lisbon, and Kaufmann Repetto, Milan.
Keller/Kosmas (Aids 3-d) approach their practice with levity and ambiguity, effectively confronting and subverting timely issues that make up the zeitgeist of contemporary culture. The collaborative duo work easily across mediums, both physical and technological, as much of their early practice exists only online. In this exhibition the pair presents custom designed solar panels (with a certified carbon neutral footprint) that convert not the energy of the sun but the energy of the audience, and in a larger sense address the crisis in confidence facing the future of our consumer culture.
Daniel Keller, (b. 1986) and Nik Kosmas (b. 1985) currently live and work in Berlin, Germany. Recent exhibitions include Andreas Melas, Athens, Seventeen Gallery, London, Gentili Apri, Berlin, The Generational: Younger Than Jesus, The New Museum of Contemporary Art, NYC and upcoming shows at T293, Naples, Memery: Imitation, Memory and Internet Culture, MASS MoCA, North Adams, MA.

