
Maureen Paley is pleased to announce a solo presentation of new work by Michael Krebber. This will be Krebber’s third exhibition at the gallery.
For several decades Krebber has investigated painterly issues, but his praxis is far from the bravura and self-assurance that formalist painting has traditionally represented. Instead of attacking – with full force, so to speak – selected painterly issues, Krebber takes a far more subtle, careful approach where strategies like deferral, hesitation and even artistic failure are applied. Throughout his highly influential career Krebber has maintained a relatively limited production and has constantly avoided pigeonholing within a particular style or mode of production. His whole oeuvre takes the form of a long succession of digressions or evasive actions, where the lack of focus and stability may seem to be the only unifying criterion one can find.
The self-reflexivity we are talking about here is of course something quite different from the modernist medium-specificity where the painting became self-reflexive in the light of a particular view of what were and what were not the medium’s own defining qualities. On the contrary, Krebber’s art is perhaps the best example of how painting is woven into an intricate system of external references. In most cases these references are not directly apparent in the works themselves.
from Gambaroff, Krebber, Quaytman, Rayne, Bergen Kunsthall 2010
Recent exhibitions include the Bergen Kunsthall, Bergen, 2010, International Project Space, Birmingham, 2010, and Portikus, Frankfurt am Main, 2007. Previous solo exhibitions have been held at Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Berlin, 2010, the Kölnischer Kunstverein, Cologne, 2008, Greene Naftali Gallery, New York, 2008, and Galerie Chantal Crousel, Paris, 2007. Numerous major publications include Respekt Frischlinge Je Suis La Chaise London Condom, published in 2008 by Galerie Daniel Buchholz, Galerie Chantal Crousel and Maureen Paley. Krebber is currently a Professor at the Städelschule, Frankfurt am Main. He lives and works in Cologne.

