
The flat or apartment is a favoured point of reference in the complexly interlinked structure of motifs that Marc Camille Chaimowicz has been creating with his works since the 1970s. Interiors with their furnishings and design appear as sites of private reverie, intimate communication, and idiosyncratic subjective sensibility. At the same time, the interior in Chaimowicz’s works functions as a site where the conventional distinction between ‘fine’ and ‘applied’ art, with its implied hierarchy, is up for discussion.
The exhibition Appartement… emerged from a conversation between Marc Camille Chaimowicz, Martin McGeown from Cabinet and Alexander Schröder. At the centre are two works that both evoke a loosely structured narrative. Here &amp; There (Now &amp; Then), 1978–2009, evokes already in its title an introspective mood where experience and memory, present and past are interlinked. On a series of wooden boards leaning against the wall, black-and-white photographs are loose arranged, in a way reminiscent of photographs spread out on a table. We see parts of elegant modern interiors – a desk, partial views of a bedroom, the corner of a living room with a side table; a male protagonist – Chaimowicz – speaks on the phone, lies on the bed, or looks out of the window deep in thought. Also a photograph of the façade of a café – Les Voyageurs – and a picture of clouds taken from an airplane. Some of the wooden boards, covered with a subtle décor, oscillate, as so often with Chaimowicz’s works, between functionality, decoration, and sculpture, are simultaneously both display elements and exhibits.
The 15 minute film Partial Views of an Interior was made in 1978 in Chaimowicz’s live-in studio on London’s Approach Road, which also served the setting for some parts of Here &amp; There (Now &amp; Then). The film is shown on several monitors distributed over the space at Mehringdamm 72. Viewers see literally partial views of an interior which step by step develop into a narrative while visitors move through the exhibition space.
A number of three dimensional works designed by the artist completes this project.
Marc Camille Chaimowicz’s work has been shown since the late 1970s throughout the world in solo and group exhibitions. He is currently showing at Nottingham Contemporary, Nottingham and at Tate Britain, London. Most notable in recent years are his solo shows at Inverleith House in Edinburgh (2010-11), at Artists Space, New York (2009), at Migros Museum, Zurich (2006). Many thanks to Martin McGeown at Cabinet and Giti Nourbaksch.

