
Currently based in Brussels, Canadian artist Zin Taylor returns to Toronto for his highly anticipated third solo exhibition at Jessica Bradley Art + Projects. Critically acclaimed internationally for his elaborate installations encompassing elements of performance and sculpture along with drawing, photography, and video, Taylor’s work revisits the process, construction and inscription of form through specific cultural histories. In the words of curator Dieter Roelstraete, his works “signal a definite shift toward a fundamental interrogation of sculpture’s basic language, if not of the very assumptions that underlie the enterprise of sculpture and art as such. How do forms come about? Do materials have a will of their own, content to speak through Zin Taylor’s hands as long as he’s able to give voice to matter’s inner thought?”
The Story of Stripes and Dots (Chapter 2) is one of pattern and form the object and the surface it presents. The familiarity of these two motifs with regards to both fashion and art history propose the development of a simple visual language. A stripe seen from head-on is a dot, a dot seen from the side could very well be a stripe. Dots are points in a conversation the tangential narrative of said conversation is represented with a stripe. These two hallmarks of abstraction are used within this series to develop a surface-language with which to read the forms they are applied to. Separated into chapters, the gesture of each exhibition suggests a back-story while insinuating a future use for the subject of stripes and dots.
Taylor’s The Story of Stripes and Dots (Chapter 1) was recently presented at MuHKA, Antwerp. Recent solo exhibitions have been held at The Artist’s Institute, New York; KIOSK Gallery, Ghent; Supportico Lopez, Berlin; Ursula Blickle Stiftung, Kraichtal, Germany; Galerie VidalCuglietta, Brussels; Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis; Miguel Abreu Gallery, New York and Isabella Bortolozzi Galerie, Berlin. His work has been included in recent group exhibitions at Centre PasquART, Biel; Witte de With, Rotterdam; Galerie Micky Schubert, Berlin; Contemporary Art Gallery, Vancouver; The Power Plant, Toronto and Presentation House, Vancouver.

