
For his third solo show at Galleria Franco Noero, Tom Burr has realized a new series of works specially conceived for the long term installation space of Piazza Santa Giulia 5 in Torino, along with a text that accompanies his exhibition:
“Consider a room impersonating a body, an inverted volume with naked walls quivering in plain view of the town, naughty little walls needing to be covered, needing to be draped and dressed. There are moral codes to apply to rooms, particularly rooms like this, rooms like this that swagger and sway and ask to be looked at, but not touched, asked to be admired, but never fondled. Consider promiscuous rooms with promiscuous walls, naughty little teasing walls that exist to be seen, exist solely to be looked at again and again.
Consider a cover in the form of a skirt, to surround the body, and the edges of the room, the edges of the room that impersonate the body. Consider the subtle rashes on the skin, on legs, on the thighs, from the rough touch of the pleated wool. When a stonemason crushes his fingers between stones itʼs called a “kiss.” Consider the rashes as kisses from the wool to the skin, from the skirt to the thigh. Consider what goes on at the outskirts of towns. Consider what goes on under a skirt.
Consider a slip, for instance, under the skirt, as it twists and moves and shifts in and out of view. It moves with, and without the skirt; it slips. It dips from time to time producing multiple hemlines and horizontal bands across hips and thighs. Hemlines go up and down, economies change. Waistlines expand and contract. Futures rise and fall. Skirts rise up and fall to the ground, leaving exposed bodies and walls and rooms. Consider scattered skirts and quivering walls, promiscuous pleats and empty rooms.” (Tom Burr, 2011)
Tom Burr (New Haven, CT) lives and works in New York. His work has appeared internationally in several solo exhibitions in Institutions and Biennials, such as: ʻUntitledʼ, 12th Istanbul Biennale; ʻTom Burr, Gravity Moves Meʼ, FRAC Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France (2011); ʻBonvicini/Burrʼ (with Monica Bonvicini), Städtische Galerie im Lenbachhaus und Kunstbau, Munich e Museum Für Gegenwartskunst Basel (2009); Addict Loveʼ, Long Island Sculpture Center, New York (2008); ʻMoodsʼ, Secession, Vienna, ʻTom Burr/Walter Pfeiffer, Swiss Institute, New York, ‘Anxiety – A Showcase’, Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin, Germany (2007); ʻExtrospective 1994- 2006ʼ, Musée Cantonal des Beaux-Arts, Losanna (2006); ‘Privy, Please’, The Norfolk Library, Norfolk, Connecticut, USA (2005); Whitney Biennial, Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; The Screens, Institute of Visual Culture, Cambridge, UK (2003); Deep Purple, Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (2002); Low Slung, Kunstverein Braunschweig, Germany.

