
On the occasion of the second exhibition at TEMPO RUBATO gallery, Guillaume Rouchon is delighted to announce a presentation of historical works by Bauhaus artist ALEXANDER “XANTI” SCHAWINSKY (1904 -1979).
XANTI SCHAWNSKY belongs to the younger generation of Bauhaus students who still made direct contact with the Masters: Paul Klee, Walter Gropius, Wassily Kandinsky, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Later friends and collaborators include Mies van der Rohe, Herbert Beyer, Lyonel Feininger, and Marcel Breuer only to cite a few.
After art studies in Switzerland and Germany, Schawinsky starts teaching at the Bauhaus in 1924 in the theater department, first Weimar and then in Dessau as the school moves. In 1933, after clashes with the Nazi authorities that reproach him for being involved in efforts to set political prisoners free, he takes refuge in Switzerland and Italy. in 1936, as fascism rises in Europe, he is invited by Josef Albers to incorporate the teaching corpus at the legendary Black Mountain College in North Carolina, USA.
Exhibiting extensively in the USA and Canada alongside his teaching work, he is notably included in “The Bauhaus 1919-1928” exhibition at the MoMA in 1939, his participation earning him an award for his sculptural work.
From 1941, Schawinsky settles in New York where he creates some of his most iconic works and continues exhibiting.
In 1963-64, he returns to Europe Italy and Switzerland where, working until his death in 1979, he is invited to individual and group exhibitions by major institutions and galleries throughout Europe and the USA.
Schawinsky applied his universal talent to painting, design as well as stage and performance, which made him a typical representative of the Bauhaus intentions that focused on creating a totality of lifestyle instead of just independent artworks.
Characteristic of Schawinsky is his extensive experimentation: He not only tested constructivist forms of expression, but also explored abstracted objects and spontaneous-expressive manifestations as well as depictive geometry. Throughout this oeuvre there is a fundamental, connecting theme: The relationship of movement and space.
Multiple experimental works, executed by Schawinsky in the 30’s and 40’s, effectively make him a forerunner and Avant-Gardist to the art of the second half of the century.
Presented for the first time in Israel, the 17 works on show at TEMPO RUBATO will be graphite and airbrush drawings, lithographs, gouache on paper and collages, spanning the years 1926 to 1946.

