
AVA is pleased to present a second exhibition by New York based artist Sergei Tcherepnin. His first show with AVA was in May, 2010. This exhibition extends Tcherepnin’s usage of performance, composition, and installation to explore the materiality of sound and its physical and psychological effects on the listener. The artist will present an installation of new works which include difference tone melodies alongside physical “furniture music” with photographs of the Pied Piper (in upstate New York). Tcherepnin writes of this work:
“Tables become doors opening into difference tone melodies from a synthetic piper. Doors become tables where you can sit and play or think. The caves become recordings which become caves again. Recordings fall into boxes whose tongues invite physical conversation. The walls speak out.”
“These boxes are mixing devices. They each contain a material narrative which you can navigate with your ears and change with your body. For the duration of the show, you will develop a score for listening to these boxes. Some possibilities are: open the lid; close the lid; move the tongue; shake the tongue; press the bottom, push your ear to the box – or any combination of these with any pacing interspersed with just staying still. There are probably many other ways of listening – but these instructions are possibilities that lay the groundwork for a flexible listening situation. The resonant space of the box contains a material narrative which moves between different material relationships – box inside box, cave inside box, box as instrument (noise), box as horn (tone). Each of these states suggest different ways of listening and moving.
The story of the Pied Piper runs as a current throughout this show. A Synthetic Piper appears in the box as a distant meanderer. At times he also interrupts these activities, singing out through two doors. He brings a new layer to the unfolding of sonic spaces – sound produced by your ear (difference tones). He enters you through your ears, and gives you no choice but to be taken by sound. Still, you can play with the relationships – left ear to box, right ear to room. Here is a possibility to hear two distinct spaces simultaneously.
The revenge of the Pied Piper isn’t so much violent, but more an opening to a possibility for a different sort of community. The Synthetic Pied Piper returns through inverse furniture music to facilitate sonic intimacies.”
Sergei Tcherepnin, 2012
Recent solo shows include exhibitions at Taka Ishii Gallery, Tokyo, with Ei Arakawa (2011), the CAC Brétigny, Paris, France, with Ei Arakawa and Gela Patashuri (2011), and the Showroom, London, with Ei Arakawa and Gela Patashuri (2011). Recent performances have been held at Issue Project Room, Brooklyn, with Woody Sullender (2012), Art Institute of Chicago with Das Institut and United Brothers (2012), Bowerbird, Philadelphia, with Woody Sullender (2011), 47 Canal (2011), and Murray Guy, New York (2011).

