
The exhibition Bodycard Testimonials by Ei Arakawa (*1977, lives in New York) and Nikolas Gambaroff (*1979, lives in New York) centers around a card-game, consisting of 325 Two-Alphabet Monograms.
In their collaboration, which started in 2008, Arakawa and Gambaroff have been working periodically on different instantiations of the Two-Alphabet Monograms. Set up as a dysfunctional written and spoken language in 2009 the project stays in constant flux and has found different formal and material existences in performances, sounds, installations, objects and speech-lessons.
“One will pat the 25 randomly drawn cards on four different parts of one’s body: Head, Heart, Gut, and Below. The result is your Two-Alphabet Monogram self-portrait, that is Bodycard Testimonial. With this testimonial being voiced out in different abstract modes, one can consult the cards of and on your past, present and future: any questions and concerns. Two-Alphabet Monograms are tools to ST IR UP AN IN TE RS UB JE CT IV EP OE TR YO CE AN.“
At Galerie Meyer Kainer, Two-Alphabet Monograms are arranged like dwellings of poets, or quasi MVRDV buildings. Surrounding these sets of buildings are inflatable men, the men with holes (i.e. on Gut), us the viewers and bodycardmen interrogating our hearts. A different version, the Two-Alphabet Monograms flags, is currently exhibited at “Ecstatic Alphabets/Heaps of Language“ at the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Although Arakawa is working always in performance, Gambaroff on the other hand mainly within painting, both share a common interest in the interrogation of language, its social, psychological, and formal structures. Their project for Galerie Meyer Kainer was developed from this perspective and is comprised of new works by the artists.
Ei Arakawa was born in Japan in 1977. He lives and works in New York. Recent solo shows include exhibitions at Taka Ishii Gallery, Tokyo, with Sergei Tcherepnin (2011), the CAC Brétigny, Paris, France, with Gela Patashuri and Sergei Tcherepnin (2011), DAAD Gallery, Berlin, with JXXXA HFBK HH and Yuki Kimura (2011), and Galerie Neu, Berlin (2010). Selected group exhibitions include shows at The Museum of Modern Art, New York (2012), The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago (2011), Kunstverein Munich (2011), Le Printemps de Septembre, Toulouse (2011), and Kunsthaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria (2011).
Nikolas Gambaroff was born in Germany in 1979. He lives and works in New York. Recent solo exhibitions include “Male Fantasies”, White Cube, London (2011), “The seven habits of highly effective people”, Swiss Institute, New York (2011), “Der Herrische Säugling“, Balice Hertling, Paris (2011), “Time is Brain“, New Jersey, Basel (2010). He has participated in numerous group exhibitions, including shows at Kunsthalle Zürich (2009), Kunsthall Bergen, Norway (2010) Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago (2011), Martin-Gropius-Bau, Berlin (2012) and Museum of Modern Art, New York (2012).
How to do the Bodycard Reading
Play with two people. One as the reader, the other one as the one to be read.
Person 1 (the one to be read) picks up 25 cards.
Person 1 places each of them on different spots on the board after using them to touch the corresponding part of his/her body: Head, Heart, Gut, Below.
Person 1 places the last card (25th card), the Emphasizing Bodycard, on any outer line that he/she feels like. (Head, Heart, Gut, Below, Pre-Past, Post-Past, Pre-Present, Post-Present, Pre-Future, Post-Future).
Let the last card touch all bodyparts.
Energy Levels: 1 Skyblue, 2 White, 3 Purple, 4 Brown, 5 Black, 6 Red White Stripes, 7 Red
The Sum of the line highlighted by the Emphasizing Bodycard ranges from 7 points to 49 point. 25 points are generally considered the most balanced score.
Read out loud, either horizontally (Head, Heart, Gut, Below) or vertically (Pre-Past, Post-Past, Pre-Present, Post-Present, Pre- Future, Post-Future), the line of cards that the Emphasizing Bodycard highlights.
Person 1 can now ask the reader any 1 question of his/her concern.
Reading Tips:
Head/Mind, Heart/Feeling, Gut/Intuition, Below/Desire Postive Letter/Lack, Negative Letter/Excess Right way up/Internal, Upside Down/External
Yearly Bodycard Testimonial (Red Bodycard). See the Poster.
Similarity of the monograms on the field. Symmetry/Asymmetry of the monograms. Echoing of the shape. Symmetry of distribution of Bodycards.

