
For her first exhibition with Andreas Melas &amp; Helena Papadopoulos, Georgia Sagri constructs a flexible arrangement of Gardens where plants grow, plastic and ceramic objects appear, actions are traced and replicated by the artist in her performance that will take place at the gallery, on three consecutive evenings. A double no or a double yes, a strategy of reappropriation- homeopathic, synchronic, interminable.
The Gardens, modular wooden boxes with aromatic plants, scattered sculptures and annexed benches, reference a site of enclosure, a stage where actor and viewer are subsumed under narrative structures already formed. Yet, Sagri, in an attempt to override the tragic fall of social and political fantasies offers French philosopher’s Alain Badiou’s event of love -“romance as the material and embodied practice of producing wonder”- as a possible space for the production of truth.
Gardens includes an installation, a performance/loop, a PowerPoint presentation, a series of photographs and drawings and a collection of texts by the artist. Georgia Sagri will also lead a workshop on performance art, in collaboration with the Institute of Experimental Arts on January 22, 23 and 24 from 6-10pm, in the gallery offices on the 1 st floor.
Georgia Sagri was born in Athens in 1979. She lives and works in New York.
She has been invited to participate in the 2012 Whitney Biennial (curated by Elisabeth Sussman and Jay Sanders) while recent exhibitions include: Georgia Sagri/Performance, Lars Friedrich, Berlin, Antigone Model, xyz Outlet, Athens, OWEN, Socrates Sculpture Garden FLOAT, NY (curated by Cleopatra’s), Live Portfolio, Grand Openings: Return of the Blogs, MoMa, NY (curated by Sabine Breitwieser, Ana Janevski &amp; Jenny Schlenzka), Μοντέλο της Αντιγόνης, Antigone Model, Real Fine Arts, ΝΥ, Mask / Species of Politics, The Luminous Interval: The D. Daskalopoulos Collection, Guggenheim Bilbao, (curated by Nancy Spector, ) MASSAGE [Paul, Rosenkranz, Sagri, Walczak], Andrew Roth Gallery, ΝΥ (curated by Alex Kitnick).

