
Stéphane Barbier Bouvet works in an extended practice, not only specific or limited to the object, but also including its context. Consequently the notions of commission, contract, and generally, the response to a particular situation, are important matters in his work. His preoccupations include design, art, and more specifically, the questions of exhibition and display.
The forms generated are as if suspended. The materials are poor, and porous to their surroundings. His economy of gesture and material tends towards a primary definition, a simplification of the object, the shape of which is the consequence of both function and material. This system similarly applies to objects and contexts created by Barbier Bouvet. Created by a given situation, a temporary definition, and committed to change, these forms are the result of displacements towards an intermediate state.
Standard &amp; Poor’s is a borrowed title. The name of a company that has been developing a rating system for companies for over 150 years, and which media resonances has been increasing over the past few years. Standard &amp; Poor’s is used here « as such », as an attitude toward the eponymous project. An exhibition (some artworks in a gallery space) and an interior (a meeting room for which the project was thought, and will then be discussed) overlapping with the response to a client’s commission.
)))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))
Stephane Barbier Bouvet (born 1981 in Marseille) studied design in Ecal, Lausanne. In 2006, He opened 1m3, an exhibition space in Lausanne, with Benjamin Valenza, Jeanne Graff, and Adrien Missika. He has been working in the context of both design and art for the five last years and is involved in education through the Baba School, a project he co-founded in Paris with Daniel Dewar and Lili Reynaud-Dewar, and the Sandberg Institute in Amsterdam. He has designed space and objects for the Federal Office of Culture in Switzerland, the City of Hyères and the Villa Noailles, Centre Pompidou, Centre d’art contemporain of Geneva, Mudac, Musée des Beaux Arts de Lausanne, Head Geneva (Haut école d’art et de design), and Centro Culturale Svizerro di Milano among others.

