
Esther Schipper is pleased to present h = 400 cm, the first solo exhibition of Karin Sander at the gallery. Within the framework of her exhibition, Sander reworks the space applying three mutually complimentary interventions.
Upon her encounter with the architecturally modified space, her reaction is radical: she transforms the space back into its former state. This is not an act of restoring, but can rather be seen as an analytical gesture. It allows the viewer to experience the ephemerality of the gallery space and the revision of a particular order the space was put under. Sander extracts the vertical plane and brings it to a horizontal position, thus making the walls into some- thing that communicates between floor, ceiling and the other walls.
On the very “base” the floor in the second gallery space Sander however adds something: a rug that has spe- cially been made for the space. It shows the invisible lines and measurements of the gallery’s floor plan. In this way Sander not only intertwines the different functionalities of construction planning and architectural design, construc- tive rationality and ornamental décor, but also occupies a definitional space in between.
In addition, Sander placed three canvases with source codes that contain their own volume.
Karin Sander, born in Bensberg, lives and works in Berlin and Zurich. She studied art and art history at the Kunst- akademie Stuttgart and at the I.S.P., Independent Study / Studio Program, I.S.P. Whitney Museum, New York. Her solo exhibitions include: Kernbohrungen, nbk, Berlin (2011); Gebrauchsbilder und Andere, Kunstmuseum St. Gallen; (2010); Zeigen. Eine Audio-Tour durch Berlin, Temporäre Kunsthalle, Berlin (2009), 1:9, Staatsgalerie Stutt- gart, Deutschland (2002).
She took part in various group shows, including: Museum of Modern Art, New York (2012); Neues Museum We- serburg, Bremen (2011); Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; 9th Sharjah Biennale, UAE (2009); Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt (2006); Skulptur. Projekten Münster (1997). Karin Sander holds a professorship at ETH (Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule / Department of Architecture) Zurich.

