
Clifton Benevento is pleased to announce Michael Clifton &amp; Michael Benevento and D’Ette Nogle present: Information from Two Sources, the New York solo debut of the Los Angeles based artist D’Ette Nogle. This exhibition features three single-channel videos and a set of photographic portfolios examining the temporal nature of art and commerce.
Entering the gallery, viewers encounter three looped videos featuring the artist as narrator: one serves to welcome viewers and the others present the artist reading and reciting texts from two different sources, an interview with actress Blake Lively taken from Elle magazine and financial advisor Porter Stansberry’s online video, The End of America.
The supposed authority of a “talking heads” aesthetic is confounded by the artist’s blank delivery. The simultaneous performance of Stansberry’s doomsday predictions and Lively’s unfazed au fait of her social and monetary capital yields a quasi-discussion of seemingly unconnected but relevant discourse on our inevitable and immanent fiscal demise and a young starlet’s bankability. The simultaneity of each video performance/playback allows the audio tracks of each to bleed into the other, ultimately coalescing into that of the artist while pointing to ways in which an artist or an artwork may enter the market in the form of an investment.
Associations of art and commerce are underscored further in Nogle’s portfolio offerings. Presented in two archives of color and black and white scanned images of the artist’s hair, these works serve as forms of self-portraiture. While the color and black and white prints allude to precious metals, these works also point to Nogle’s interest in temporality in art as first evidenced in her 2011 installation Floral Entry for Gallery at Clifton Benevento as part of 3348 hours of Sunshine. Indicative of age and loss, the color of hair fades from gold to gray: the end is near; for Nogle, the site of viewing art represents the end of her production phase and the loss of the project at the moment of exhibition.
D’Ette Nogle was born in La Mirada, CA in 1974 and received her MFA from the University of California, Los Angeles. She has been featured in solo exhibitions at Parker Jones, Room Gallery and L.A.C.E (all Los Angeles), and group shows at Clifton Benevento, Romer Young Gallery (San Francisco), Circus and David Salow Gallery (both Los Angeles). Her work is currently featured in Made in L.A. at The Hammer Museum. She lives and works in Los Angeles.

