
Michael Benevento is pleased to present STW, a solo exhibition by the London based artist Bonnie Camplin.
Informed by a practice that produces both immaterial events and material works, Bonnie Camplins aesthetic incorporates interdisciplinary research to negotiate the axis between states of mindlessness and mindfulness inside the creative act. This axis what the artist refers to as “Subjective Emergence Where Theory is Manifest as Practice” produces myriad forms, including HB pencil and biro drawings, watercolors, ink drawings and paper sculptures. For STW, these art objects are the record of immanent experimentation, an attempt to psychically optimize the evolutionary tension between biology and technology.
Analogy is the mechanism of thought. For Camplin, drawing is the sublime technology for thinking. Archetypes, whether pictorial, abstract or formal are organizations of energy patterns; Camplin works within the mystery of the psycho-physical realm, taking semiotics as physical stimulus. The artist’s drawings are the physical record of experimental pictorial semiotics.
Bonnie Camplin (b. 1970, United Kingdom), is a London based artist, para-theatrical producer, director, dancer and performer of experimental club nights. Recent solo exhibitions include Stone Tapes (Galeria Cinzia Friedlander, Berlin) and Railway Mania (Middlesborough Institute of Modern Art, UK) and in group exhibitions at Tate Modern and Tate Britain (London), ICA (London), Marres Centre for Contemporary Culture, Maastricht and RHA Gallery, Royal Hibernian Academy, (Dublin). She has collaborated with internationally acclaimed artists including Enrico David, Mark Leckey, Lucy McKenzie and Paulina Olowska and has lectured at The Ruskin School, Oxford and the University of Manchester. From 2008- 2010 she was Professor of the Film-Class at Städelschule, Frankfurt. Her most recent project (in collaboration with Kieron Livingstone and James Mullord) was devising and leading a workshop on the metaphysics of surveillance at Hayward Gallery, London as part of the Wide Open School project. She is currently a visiting lecturer at Goldsmiths College, London.

