
Robert Grosvenor will present a new work at Paula Cooper Gallery, opening February 4 and running through March 10, 2012. Untitled (2011) is a two-part sculpture whose components include fiberglass, aluminum and concrete blocks. The exhibition will also present Untitled (1986-87), a piece consisting of a fragment of concrete wall lying on a blue tarp and sheltered by a steel structure.
Since first exhibiting at Park Place Gallery in 1965, Robert Grosvenor has created varied and stimulating bodies of sculpture and works on paper. His recent work, created out of materials such as wood, fiberglass or concrete, often consists of discrete and dissimilar elements put into relationship within a given space. While abstract and at times inscrutable, his structures make oblique allusions to our everyday environment: bridges, fences, terraced patios or low-slung rock walls are variously suggested, yet, through the artist’s entirely original idiom, they are transfigured into singular and evocative forms that offer a fresh redefinition of sculpture.
Born in New York City in 1937, Robert Grosvenor studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and the Ecole Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs in France and the Universitá di Perugia in Italy. His work has been prominently included in important exhibitions such as “Primary Structures” (Jewish Museum, 1966) and “Minimal Art” (Den Haag Gementemuseum, 1968), which helped define minimalism. He soon diverged from this movement to create challenging works that resist assimilation to any of the prevailing art movements. Important one-person exhibitions of Grosvenor’s work have been presented at the Kunsthalle Bern (1992) and the Fundaçao de Serralves, Porto (2005). Most recently, he participated in the 2010 Whitney Biennial. Grosvenor’s work is included in the collections of the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Storm King Art Center, New York, the Museum of Modern Art, New York, the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Serralves Museum, Porto.

