
The exhibition of ANNETTE KELM (*1975, lives in Berlin) and MICHAELA MEISE (*1976, lives in Berlin) is based on an amicable and artistic discourse. Although MEISE is working sculptural, KELM on the other hand photograpical, both share a common interest in the interrogation of the image and its status. Their project for Galerie Meyer Kainer was developed from this ground.
In their dialogic process, which started at a common exhibition in the Kunstverein Bonn, KELM and MEISE blank the typical questions about the individual gesture. A conversation is something ephemeral, altering and evolving with every intervention. Changing its moods and topics in the course of the encounter, it can lead to actions or effects that were not necessarily part of the dialogue. The exhibition shows both new and older works of the artists.
KELMS photographies show iron filings on coloured board, that aligne through magnetism, similar to an experiment. It could also be an analogy to the slow morking methods of analogue photography. MEISEs new objects show the morphology of an organic form. A repetitive motif is that of Balance and Laughter in sculpture, which is interpreted orally and rather gloomy. The motif for the invitation card (titled LO) is a common work of KELM and MEISE.
Besides her professorship at the University of Arts in Berlin MICHAELA MEISE has been presenting her work for several years at international level (e.g. Grazer Kunstverein, Graz; Greene Naftali, New York; Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin; Kunsthalle Schirn, Frankfurt a.M.) Over the past years, the work of ANNETTE KELM excelled in exhibitions at international venues like the Biennale in Venice 2011, the KW – Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; the Kunsthalle, Zürich; the Witte de With, Rotterdam; the CCA Wattis, San Francisco and the Hamburger Bahnhof; Berlin).
Inviting two artists to develop a common exhibition, Galerie Meyer Kainer positions itself as open space for the presentation of artistic exchange. The series started in January 2012 with an exhibition of Siggi Hofer, Stefan Sandner and Liam Gillick and will be continued with a common project of Ei Arakawa and Nik Gambaroff in May.

