
There are facts:
On July 9, 2013, the web journal The New Inquiry released Further Materials Toward a Theory of the Man-Child by Mal Ahern and Moira Weigel, and the essay went viral http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/further-materials-toward-a-theory-of-the-man-child/. Serving up more than one version of what or who possibly lurks behind every Young-Girl http://libcom.org/files/jeune-fille.pdf, the essay articulated a term of engagement rampant not only in academia where the authors circulate, but endemic as well in the worlds of contemporary art and its structures of success– a disgracefully sexist field. A solo exhibition by Anicka Yi at STUDIOLO slated for September 2013 evolved into a collaborative project among Anicka Yi, Jordan Lord, Lise Soskolne and Carissa Rodriguez. Yi and Lord’s reading of Derrida’s The Politics of Friendship became the grounds for a related conversation about responsibility, call and response. The group asked others to respond to Ahern and Weigel’s essay in the form of a poster, image, or text to be compiled into a publication.
In the place of art, the gallery will be greased in everything butt-her.
There are feelings:
Less an attempt at unpacking the baggage of this exhausting and lugubrious subject, symptom or condition (the Man-Child), the notion of the friend was introduced in opposition. There are degrees of familiarity between Jordan Lord, Anicka Yi, Lise Soskolne and Carissa Rodriguez, ranging from the most casual of acquaintance to decades of friendship. Crossing the ecliptic range of familiarity is another axis an identification with different aspects of Ahern and Weigel’s essay that unfolds, opens out and crashes into the relations between these people and to the people they know. During the summer of 2013, the Man-Child was a speculation, a specter, and finally an agonistic spectacle in which friends make promises, turn pro, fuck up and compete; committing again and again to the perpetual contest of production, reproduction, and the misappropriation of love.
Oh my friends, there is no friend.

