
The Lia Rumma Gallery is pleased to announce the solo show by the artist Gilberto Zorio at the space of the gallery in Via Stilicone in Milan. The exhibition will be developed on the three foors of the gallery, which will alternate between light and darkness. Gilberto Zorio explores space by dealing with themes that oscillate between experience, contrasts and the unknown.
The exhibition begins in the large room on the ground foor with “Torre Stella” (Star Tower), a construction of Gasbeton blocks arranged in a star-shaped plan. Since antiquity, the star is an instrument that has been linked both to orientation and desire. The points of the star will get longer and spread clockwise within the radial area. The interior of the tower will be partly visible and the luminescence caused by the sudden darkness will be clearly visible.
Completing the exhibition on the ground foor are the works “Stella di cuoio su giavellotti”, 2007, a leather star suspended by two spears, “L’Arco che sorregge la stella”, 2008: a star rises at the end of a bow, the base water, sulphate and fuorescein activate the production of crystal salt, that later will cover the structure.
Alchemic signs, which are usually not visible, will appear throughout the room. The foundry ladles are vessels used for the manual transport of crucibles containing incandescent molten bronze which is ready to be poured into the negative mould-valve of the sculpture. The ladles normally act as the tools used to make a sculpture but in Zorio’s show they are transformed into actual art works themselves. On the frst foor the show continues with another Star Tower. In the space illuminated by sunlight, the construction spreads into the outdoor area going along the terrace while the work Luci, 1968, (Lights, 1968) tries to complete with the glare of the Sun and is ready to illuminate itself and the ensuing darkness. On the second foor, which is in darkness, there will be Pyrex containers, rubber containers, signs and works that are visible thanks to the use of coagulated materials which are frequently employed in Zorio’s work. The luminescence and the discharges, the Tesla coils, will occupy privileged positions on the three foors. Light, darkness and exploration are inter-connected themes like the elements that indicate the vessels, the star, the chemical reactions and forms of energy. They are forms of energy that have stories to tell.

