

“Erasing distances, but keeping the differences, Michelangelo Pistoletto
Balice Hertling and Nilufar Gallery are pleased to present ‘’AIMER LES DIFFERENCES’’ for Love Difference Artistic Movement for an InterMediterranean Politic, an exhibition by Michelangelo Pistoletto (b.1933, Biella). This ongoing project, coordinated by the Cittadellarte Politics Office, was begun in 2002 and was presented at the 50th Venice Biennale in 2003. Love Difference Artistic Movement for an InterMediterranean Politic is a non-profit association of 650 members, including international institutions, cultural centres, researchers, curators and artists. The association aims to find ways of overcoming the conflicts between different cultures while maintaining and appreciating their differences. For his exhibition at Balice Hertling, Paris, Michelangelo Pistoletto presents works from two series he made as part of this cross-cultural dialogue.
Three painted wall pieces from the series ‘’Love Difference’’ (2002) each contain mirrors in the shape of the Mediterranean Sea. These works are part of a series of 23, the number of countries that surround the Mediterranean Sea. This series was previously shown at the the MuHKA, Antwerpen (2003), the Musée dArt Moderne, Saint-Etienne (2007), and it appeared in the travelling exhibition, Viaggio nell’arte italiana, organized by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2008-2009).
The sea theme flows throughout 27 chairs from another body of work, 248 Laleggera Chairs by Alias (2009). For this series, Michelangelo Pistoletto and Juan E.Sandoval painted the 7 seas on chairs designed by Riccardo Blumer. Across these particular 27 chairs stretches the coastline of the Baltic Sea. Each individual chair depicts one part of the coastline. Like pieces of a puzzle, they are each different but must come together in one installation to form the whole picture.
A portion of the sales will be donated to Love Difference Artistic Movement for InterMediterranean Politic. This exhibition coincides with a large-scale solo exhibition by Michelangelo Pistoletto at the Musée du Louvre, Paris. To accompany this exhibition, the Louvre will dedicate a series of lectures and events to the artist.


