
Malmö Konsthall wants to use the exhibition 24 Spaces to present a number of non-commercial artist- or curator-driven activities. This is an attempt to use the Nordic region as a starting point to examine various alternative exhibition spaces. We have also invited Sweden’s four post-secondary art education institutions plus the Konstfack University College of Arts, Crafts and Design in Stockholm and The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen to participate in order to showcase the diversity of their styles, their similarities and differences. We intend to highlight all the diverse artistic forms of expression which are currently being created or exhibited in the Nordic region and our geographic vicinity.
The 24 Spaces exhibition literally creates spaces for non-commercial activities. For the exhibition, Malmö Konsthall has been divided into 24 spaces of 80 square metres each. One of the spaces will be in the park adjacent to Malmö Konsthall.
Participants have been able to decide themselves how their allocated space will be used and how many people will exhibit there. Some participants might choose to present one artist, others, several different ones. Some spaces will feature the same exhibition throughout this time period, whilst others maybe present a series of artists and a therefore changing exhibition over time.
There is a clear interest in global collaboration and an awareness of its importance, and we hope that the various contributions to 24 Spaces will promote discussion and dialogue.
Participating spaces:
1857 (NO)
The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts (DK)
Index – The Swedish Contemporary Art Foundation (SE)
kim? Contemporary Art Centre (LV)
Kling &amp; Bang gallery (IS)
Koh-i-noor (DK)
Konstfack University College of Arts, Crafts and Design, Stockholm (SE)
Malmö Art Academy (SE)
The Royal Institute of Art, Stockholm (SE)
Lilith Performance Studio (SE)
NoPlace (NO)
OEI (SE)
PARENT (SE/IS)
Pist Protta (DK)
Ruler (FI)
SIC (FI)
The Gardens (LT)
The Living Art Museum (IS)
Tidens Krav (NO)
Toves Gallery (DK)
Transmission Gallery (GB)
The Umeå Academy of Fine Arts (SE)
Valand Academy, Gothenburg (SE)
VI, VII (NO)

