
Impressed by the still lifes of Cézanne and Nicholas de Staël, Ilse d’Hollander started her painting practice in the early 1990s in her Gent studio. In 1994, after moving her studio to the Ardennes mountains, she began to neglect figurative aspects in her work in favor of concerted, harmonically balanced abstract elements which are applied in many layers onto the canvas. Her oeuvre is also very much influenced by her friendship with the Belgian painter, Raoul de Keyser, who encouraged the young painter to continue with her intuitive and sublime methods. The works presented at Konrad Fischer Galerie – small format oil paintings on fibreboard and gouaches were created during the last years of her life.
Ever since its presentation at documenta 12, the work of Charlotte Posenenske is associated with sculpture – colored foldings and reliefs, square tubes made of sheet steel and cardboard as well as the so called Drehflügel. Her little known painted works were created in 1956/57, ten years before the sculptures were introduced. After finishing her studies with Willi Baumeister in the early 1950s, Charlotte Posenenske worked as a stage designer and costume director in several theatres. The early Spachtelarbeiten (palette-knife works) and Rasterbilder (Grids), executed in oil or casein paint on fibreboard and paper, were created between 1956 and 1960. Some masterfully painted gestural drawings and palette-knife works followed, partly painted plein-air in her native Taunus mountains. References can be found in the early landscape paintings and compositions of Piet Mondrian and in the so called „Buchi“ by Lucio Fontana. Before Charlotte Posenenske started experimenting with spray paint, felt-tip pen and adhesive tapes (already related to her sculptural pieces) she created impressive gestural abstractions. After publishing her famous manifesto in 1968, she concluded her artisitic oeuvre and began her studies in Sociology.
British artist Jessica Warboys (lives and works in Suffolk, London and Paris) could be considered a multi-talent: her oeuvre includes painting, stained glass and sculpture as well as video, film, artist’s books and performance. Different media and genres are amalgamated into a prolific mélange in which canvases and stained glass-objects function as „actors“ in her films and in-situ installations involve film projections as well as canvases and objects within a multi-faceted and elegant combination. In her Sea-Paintings the artist leaves the painterly process to evironmental forces: a canvas prepared with pigments is left to the waves and influence of the salt water of the Atlantic Ocean. Recent exhibitions at dOCUMENTA 13, Künstlerhaus Graz, Bielefelder Kunstverein and South London Gallery have introduced Jessica Warboys to a broad international audience.

