
On the occasion of the berlin gallery weekend, the Haubrokfoundation inducts its new space in Lichtenberg, Berlin, on April 24, 2013 from 7 to 10 pm. FAHRBEREITSCHAFT, set up with a logo by Heimo Zobernig, will from now on not only be home to its regular tenants such as the arbeiter-samariter-bund, an auto body shop, a tire dealer and several craftsman’s workshops, but will also supply producing artists with studios on the one hand and occasionally host temporary art presentations on the other.
Until the fall of the berlin wall the grounds of Herzbergstr. 40-43 hosted the “Abteilung Verkehr” (Department of Transportation) of the former communist SED-government. The high-security area served as a home base for “capitalist” neighbors’ visitor tours through the true socialist realism of the GDR. The west-german kpd party, and afterwards also the DKP, were supported and financed from here. the exploitation of the complex, approximately 200,000 square feet in size, has been continued ever since without considerable changes. It still accommodates numerous garages and workshops, but also a dining hall including the respective canteen kitchen, a bar, a ninepins alley and even a sauna. Since the 1950’s there have not been any structural measures taken changing the buildings or the grounds themselves-the ravages of time left their marks, but the building structures are steady.
On the occasion of the Berlin Gallery Weekend, April 26-28, 2013, the Haubrokfoundation will be realizing two separate exhibition projects in two different spots of FAHRBEREITSCHAFT. “Abstrakt” will show primarily painterly items, all of them presented in the worn down storage depot (lagerhalle). Central element is the mutual correspondence of art and the leftovers of the room’s former commercial utilization, which have artwork-like character themself. The kasino will display invitations (bulletins) of the former amsterdam-based gallery art &amp; project. from 1968 to 1989, this gallery has been in charge of the who’s who of conceptual artists. Their folded invitations became artworks themselves over and over again. We are happy to present these documents of the foundation of conceptual art in the basically unmodified GDR-rooms of FAHRBEREITSCHAFT, a space that has resisted the tremendous changes that occurred some miles to the west almost without any notice.
Axel Haubrok

