
Dodie Kazanjian: So the show is mainly your pictures of performing artists, from Jonas Kaufmann to David Bowie,
Elizabeth Peyton: Yes. Because I get so much flack for supposedly making pictures of celebrities, I’ve always shied away from putting together a big group of well-known people.
Dodie Kazanjian: So what changed your mind?
Elizabeth Peyton: At the end of the day, I can’t censor myself. I know what these pictures are about. It’s a celebration of making art and people expressing themselves. That’s what I believe in. So I thought, why hide this? Why not see what these pictures look like together? I thought it would be pretty cool.
(Extract from the conversation The Sound of Painting between Dodie Kazanjian and Elizabeth Peyton, 2012, published in full length in the exhibition catalog.)
From March 9, 2013 on, artworks of New York-based painter Elizabeth Peyton will be on display at Staatliche Kunsthalle Baden-Baden. Here She Comes Now is the title of the exhibition for which the artist has chosen to show a specific selection of works: Exclusively and for the first time ever in this combination, portraits of musicians are on view in Baden-Baden. For instance you will encounter David Bowie, Pete Doherty, Jessye Norman or Jonas Kaufmann performing on stage.
These portraits attest to Peytons intensive examination of a most vulnerable but at the same time pivotal moment in the process of artistic creation: the moment in which musicians enter the stage and step in front of the audience. Hence the selected works are also a reflection of the very nature of creativity.
Here She Comes Now will present 30 oil paintings and works on paper from the last 20 years. The vast majority of the exhibits are part of private American collections and have rarely or not at all been shown in Germany.
In addition to that Elizabeth Peyton will, for the first time, exhibit a number of photographs – instant shots depicting live events – that are the point of departure for most of her works. These images will be reproduced in the exhibition catalog alongside respective paintings by the artist.
 
