
The collection of Barbara and Axel Haubrok in Berlin is one of the leading collections of contemporary art in Germany. Like no other, it focuses consistently on international contemporary Concept Art and thus on multimedia art, in particular on video, photography and installations.
As of the end of the year, Deichtorhallen Hamburg will be presenting in its Sammlung Falckenberg satellite a representative cross-section of works from the Haubrok Collection. Inviting private collectors to exhibit their works in Hamburg has meanwhile become a veritable tradition. Thanks to it, specifically in the premises of Sammlung Falckenberg spectacular and in part quite unforeseeable interaction between artworks arise. This form of dialog or mutual commentary not only affords a comprehensive insight into the visiting collection in a new context but also offers a new take on the Sammlung Falckenberg as part of the Deichtorhallen exhibition program.
The Berlin couple was invited to decide the exhibition concept and installation themselves and choose how to use the premises and participate in the Sammlung Falckenberg agenda. Installations will form the core of the exhibition, featuring more than 60 pieces from the Haubrok Collection. The selection focuses on formal, essentially restrained works that for that reason alone already contrast with most of the Sammlung Falckenberg’s holdings.The list of artists includes well-known names such as Martin Boyce, Carol Bove, Christoph Büchel, Martin Creed, Willem de Rooij, Rodney Graham, Wade Guyton, Cady Noland, Simon Starling, Kelley Walker, Haegue Yang and Heimo Zobernig. It will also present lesser-known artists such as Michael Beutler, Tim Lee, Rodney McMillian, Ruben Ochoa, Stephen Prina, Michael Riedel or Jan Timme.
The exhibition will stretch across three floors of the Sammlung Falckenberg building in Harburg. Michael Riedel has developed a poster piece for the exhibition that will also be on show at the Sammlung Haubrok in Berlin next year. Berlin-based artist Michael Beutler has expanded his site-specific piece entitled »Copy Graffitty« with in light of the specific spatial setting in Harburg. Moreover, light art by Cerith Wyn Evans and Olafur Eliasson will be on display on the factory floors of Sammlung Falckenberg and there are sets of works by Haegue Yang and Florian Slotawa awaiting discovery by visitors. A film theater has been created to screen Rodney Graham’s »Two Generators«.
The exhibition is entitled »No Desaster« after a terse drawing by Georg Herold, an artist represented in both collections. The title is also intended to highlight the fact that the encounter between two so very different approaches to collecting need by no means culminate in chaos. Rather, the idea is to have the conceptual positions championed in the Haubrok Collection interact with the more provocative positions espoused at Sammlung Falckenberg. Both collections elucidate representative angles taken in postmodern contemporary art.

