
22 Others is a conceptual art project created by Mary Beth Edelson between 1971 and 1973 with the intention to both expand the artist’s connections with her community by inviting others into her art making process and experimenting with Carl Jung’s construct of the collective unconscious.
Forty years after Edelson’s initial installment of 22 Others in Washington D.C., this historical exhibition is restaged for its New York debut at The Suzanne Geiss Company. The exhibition is organized by Tim Goossens.
EDELSON ON THE PROJECT
“The resulting collaborative experiment of 22 Others began in 1971 by inviting 22 people to come to my studio, discuss my work, and then suggest a piece they would like for me to produce. The intention was to meditate on their suggestions, taking that energy, and fusing it with my own to come up with a third energy that would (hopefully) generate the premise for each of the 22 art works. This conceptual project was based in Jung’s construct of the collective unconscious, and was inspired by my five year participation in a Jungian seminar, and my fascination with the possibilities inherent in the theory of the collective unconscious. This process generated a number of breakthrough works that resulted in an exhibition titled 22 Others simultaneously held at the Corcoran Gallery of Art and Henri Gallery, Washington DC, 1973.” –The Art of Mary Beth Edelson, p. 106, 2002.
ABOUT MARY BETH EDELSON
Mary Beth Edelson (b. 1933, East Chicago, IN) has been a pioneer of the Feminist Art movement in the United States and Europe since the early 1970s. Her performances, paintings, and collages have relentlessly explored the role of women in society and challenged dominant patriarchal values that subvert human liberation. In Some Living Woman Artists/Last Supper (1972), based on Leonardo Da Vinci’s famous mural, Edelson collaged the heads of prominent women artists over the figures of Christ and his disciples. These often-censored works, along with four others in the series, are in MoMA’s (NYC) permanent collection, and are frequently on view.
Currently Edelson’s work is included in “NYC 1993: Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star,” New Museum, NYC; “Strong Women Matriarchy and Utopia,” Museum voor Moderne Kunst, Arnhem, Netherlands. Other recent exhibitions include: “Burn in Hell,” Balice &amp; Hertling, Paris; “Hail to the Feminists Who Produced the Revolution,” Accola &amp; Griefen, NYC; “Pictures by Women: A History of Modern Photography,” curated by Sarah Meister and Eva Respini, MoMA, NYC; “There is Never Only One Game in Town,” MAC, Dallas, curated by Liutaraus Psibilskis; “Gender Battle,” CGAC, curated by Juan Vicente Aliaga, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Mumok Museum of Contemporary Art, Vienna; “The End,” Andy War- hol Museum, curated by Eric Shiner, Pittsburg, PA; “It’s Time for Action (There’s No Option)About Feminism,”curated by Heike Munder, Migros Museum, Zurich; “WACK!” organized by Connie But- ler presented at MoMA PS1,NYC; MoCA LA; Women’s Museum, DC; and Vancouver Museum; “A Life Well Lived, A Retrospective of Mary Beth Edelson’s Work,” Malmo Museum of Art, Sweden.

