
Corridor Plateau is the title of a record by Detlef Weinrich. The occasion for recording was an exhibition of the same name (2011), which was part of a series curated by Christian Freudenberger and Markus Karstieß at Kunstverein Schwerte (2008 – 2011). Since then Corridor Plateau has been migrating in changing constellations as an independent exhibition format through various spaces, places, cabinets and corridors.
“I have examined maps of the city with the greatest care, yet have ne- ver again found the Rue d’Auseil. These maps have not been modern maps alone, for I know that names change. I have, on the contrary, delved deeply into all the antiquities of the place; and have personally explored every region, of whatever name, which could possibly answer to the street I knew as the Rue d’Auseil. But despite all I have done it remains an humiliating fact that I cannot find the house, the street, or even the locality, where, during the last months of my impoverished life as a student of metaphysics at the university, I heard the music of Erich Zann.”
H.P. Lovecraft: “The Music of Erich Zann”. © 1922 by The National Amateur Magazine.
With roots in the remote, the power of darkness, the depth and the (own) unea- se, the exhibition series Corridor Plateau develops a shadowed spatial frame- work, a cabinet, a chamber, a plateau, from which the tone of the artefacts per- meates through to us. We pass through the cupboard into the next room, sear- ching for a place that will never be found – hidden, lost, forgotten.
The stories of author H. P. Lovecraft can be considered collective mediators, communicating ideas of untraceable streets, hidden rooms and repeated storyli- nes (“The music of Erich Zann”). The energies and tones of his narratives are topical – though they signal the misshapen and monstrous within ourselves, and our forlornness in civilization. We don’t know when it happens. We see refe- rences to the Modern and a future beyond the crash of the present. You sit there, with your own, and everything begins.
Music
Detlef Weinrich studied sculpture at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. Since 1994 he has been a member of the previously founded band Kreidler. In 2004 Detlef Weinrich was co-founder of the “Salon Amateurs” in Düsseldorf. Under the DJ alias Tolouse Low Trax, Weinrich also creates solo music. His debut album Mask Talk became a moody synthie-album with curious place- and timeless, almost ghostly tracks, reminiscent of the sounds of horror films.
Corridor Plateau continues in this dark tendency. The pieces on the record are arranged in corridors 1-6. We traverse through these cryptic corridors and hear the unknown approaching, coming ever closer. Corridor Plateau derives its inspiration from the dystopian fictions of H. P. Lovecraft, and is simultaneously an homage to the soundscapes of French composer and artist Ghedalia Tazartes. The needle moves from the inner to the outer edge of the vinyl, to achieve the maximal bass effect at the peak of each groove, and because the dance of the needle towards the edge seems to us like the dance on the narrow tip of existen- ce – right on the brink. Corridor Plateau was released by apparent-extent in Cologne.

