
Algus Greenspon is pleased to announce an exhibition of photographs by Torbjørn Rødland opening on Tuesday, September 10, 2013. Rødland’s work has been seen widely in New York group shows since 1998. The current exhibition is the artist’s first New York solo show. Included is a selection of recent color and black and white photographs, many of which appear in Rødland’s most recent book, Vanilla Partner (MACK, 2012). A reception for the artist will be held from 6–8pm on the day of the opening.
It takes very little to set things off kilter in Torbjørn Rødland’s photographs. Diverse and direct, his images twist the commonplace into the uncanny. Disarmingly prosaic and mythic without obvious symbolism, these pictures are something new.
The deep openness of Rødland’s photographs makes it appear as if anything could produce a rewarding and meaningful image. “I don’t play with or reference art history”, Rødland says. There is no agenda, no thematic preconceptions. Just a multitude of images, each one individual and generous. By integrating the concerns of recent photography – appropriation, historical reference, transgressive imagery, set‐up photography, commercial style, and documentary subject matter – with the formal rigor and spiritual intent of much classical photography, Rødland’s art ambitiously exposes a novel and intricate unity radically at odds with the fractured multiplicity of postmodern photography. Interestingly, the astute criticality of Rødland’s photography comes not from deconstruction but from its opposite, offering a surfeit of interpretation unbound to any program.
Lacking conceptual agendas, Rødland’s pictures are, unlike the work of many younger photographers, neither obvious or didactic. Nor do they partake of the increasingly repetitive retinue of subject matter common in much contemporary work. And although many of Rødland’s photographs are obviously staged, because he is often pushing things to their limits they do not feel staged. We know that that man can bend over, but just how far is a surprise. We have expectations. We just had no idea what they were.
Torbjørn Rødland (b. 1970, Stavanger, Norway) lives and works in Los Angeles, USA. Selected solo exhibitions include: Air de Paris, Paris (2012); STANDARD (OSLO), Oslo (2011); Hiroshima City Museum of Contempo- rary Art, Hiroshima (2010); Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis, St. Louis (2010); and MoMA PS1, New York (2006). Rødland participated in the 48th Venice Biennale (1999) and has exhibited in group exhibitions includ- ing those at: Musée d’Art Contemporain de Lyon, Lyon (2009); Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago (2005); and Centre Pompidou, Paris (2000).

