
Thin skin made ear
Taut drum struck by
Dry sticks in wind
Each swift-clicked
Twig-snapped song
Sought for Hole
In Mask of air
Sewn Mouth
Made Wind seep
Through Mask
Through Hole
For each Eye
But no Wind
Can wait –
Same Song
Soon chimed
Twice:
Hole in drum
Gaped into Mouth
And asked
Are you
A hole too
No said Mouth
I am Crown
Of all sound
Through me
All men
Must pass
Yeah right
Said Hole
Then why
Am I
Holding them
All of them
Right now
Then Same Song
Sung itself
A-new:
Dear Hole
I am Mole
I dug You
And came
Through you
So You could
Hear me here
&nbsp;
About the artists:
Anne Carson (b.1950, Toronto) is a poet, essayist, translator and professor of Classics. Among her works are Autobiography of Red (Knopf, 1998) and The Beauty of the Husband (Knopf, 2001) as well as celebrated translations of Sappho, Euripides and Sophocles. Her latest book is Red Doc&gt; (Knopf, 2013). Carson has received numerous awards and prizes for her poetry, including a MacArthur Fellowship and an Honorary Degree from the University of Toronto.
￼The poem in this exhibition, “Gnosticism VI”, was first published in Decreation: Poetry, Essays, Opera (Knopf, 2005).
&nbsp;
Eduardo C. Corral is an American poet and teacher. His poems have appeared in Best American Poetry 2012, Beloit Poetry Journal, Huizache, Jubilat, New England Review, Ploughshares, Poetry, Poetry Northwest, and Quarterly West. His work has been honoured with a Discovery/The Nation Award, and the J. Howard and Barbara M. J. Wood Prize from Poetry. His first book Slow Lightning (Yale University Press) was published in 2012 as the winner of the Yale Younger Series Poets competition. He currently lives in New York City.
The title of this exhibition, Fever Thread, is his contribution.
&nbsp;
Lisa Jarnot (b. 1967, New York) lives and works in New York City. She is the author of four full-length collections of poetry: Some Other Kind of Mission (Burning Deck Press, 1996), Ring of Fire (Zoland Books, 2001 and Salt Publishers, 2003), Black Dog Songs (Flood Editions, 2003) and Night Scenes (Flood Editions, 2008), as well as the biography Robert Duncan: The Ambassador From Venus (University of California, 2012). A collection of selected poems was published by City Lights in 2013.
Her work in this exhibition has not been previously published.
&nbsp;
Geoff Hilsabeck is the author of Vaudeville (The Song Cave, 2011) and The Keepers of Secrets (Kenyon Review, 2004). His poems, essays, and translations have appeared in various journals, including 66; Seneca Review; Forklift, Ohio; and We Are So Happy to Know Something. He teaches English literature in Concord, MA.
“Images Drawn from Days”, which is his contribution to this exhibition, is not previously published.
&nbsp;
￼Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844–1889) ranks among the greatest poets of Victorian literature, even though his idiosyncratic style kept his works from being accepted for publication until 1918. In 1866 he converted to catholicism, made a bonfire of his poems and gave up poetry for seven years. He was ordained as a jesuit priest in 1877 and worked in a number of parishes in London, Liverpool, Manchester and Glasgow, before becoming a professor of Greek at University College in Dublin in 1884.
The poems included in this exhibition are numbered 42 and 44 in Gerard Manley Hopkins: Poems and Prose (Penguin Classics, 1985).
&nbsp;
Kim Hyesoon (b. 1955) lives in Seoul, where she teaches creative writing at the Seoul Institute of the Arts. She was one of the first women in South Korea to be published in a literary journal when her work appeared in Munhak kwa jisong (Literature and Intellect) in 1979. Three English translations of Kim’s poetry by Don Mee Choi have appeared: When the Plug Gets Unplugged (Tinfish Press, 2005); Mommy Must Be a Fountain of Feathers (Action Books, 2008); and All the Garbage of the World, Unite! (Action Books, 2011).
Her poem “Rat” was first published in Mommy Must Be a Fountain of Feathers.
&nbsp;
Marzanna Kielar (b. 1963) lives and works in Warsaw, where she graduated in philosophy from Warsaw University. She co-operates with the literary magazine Krasnogruda. She has published two collections of poetry and has received the Kazimiera Illakowiczówna Prize for the best debut of the year, and the Koscielski Foundation Prize. An English– Polish bilingual edition of Salt Monody (Zephyr Press, 2006) was published in 2006, with translations from Polish by Elzbieta Wójcik-Leese.
The poem included in this exhibition, “At Breakfast”, first appeared in Salt Monody.
&nbsp;
Manuela Leinhoß (b. 1973) lives and works in Berlin. She studied philology and philosophy at the University of Cologne. Solo shows of her work include Like a Human Being, RaebervonStenglin, Zürich (2013); and V e r t i e f e n, Galerie Micky Schubert, Berlin (2010). She has participated in group shows at Fellbach Triennale, Fellbach; Laura Bartlett Gallery, London; Karma International, Zurich; and Kunsthalle Basel. Her work features in the publications: A FORMAL FEELING COMES, published by Galerie Micky Schubert (2008); and Rooms Look Back, Kunsthalle Basel (2008).
Two new pieces by Manuela Leinhoß are included in this exhibition.
&nbsp;
Jan Erik Vold is arguably the most famous living Norwegian poet. His poems are widely read, and he has also worked as an essayist, editor and translator. Since his first book mellom speil og speil (Gyldendal, 1965) he has written numerous books of poetry, among them Mor Godhjertas glade versjon. Ja (Gyldendal, 1968); sirkel sirkel (Gyldendal, 1979); and Kalenderdikt (Gyldendal, 1995), as well as translations of authors such as William Carlos Williams, Samuel Beckett, Tomas Tranströmer and Wallace Stevens. He lives and works in Stockholm.
His poem “The Tree and The Non-Tree“ was first published in Tolv Meditasjoner (Gyldendal, 2002).
&nbsp;
Gunnar Wærness (b. 1971, Trondheim) is the author of five collections of poetry, among them Tungen &amp; tåren (The tongue &amp; the tear, 2013) and Bli verden (Become the world), 2007. Wærness is also an editor, translator, illustrator. He is currently working with the multi–medial cabaret Brødet &amp; Eselet (The Bread &amp; the Donkey, 2010–14) with the artist Henrik Skotte. He lives and works in Skåne, Sweden.
Gunnar Wærness has contributed the press release for this exhibition.
&nbsp;
Special thanks to Ben Estes of The Song Cave
1857 is supported by Arts Council Norway

