
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
–Hamlet
As technology grows more sophisticated everyday, gadgets and pieces of equipment can seem to take on a life of their own: smart phones organize our lives for us, fridges give us advice on what to eat for dinner and websites remember our internet browsing history. In this touring exhibition curator Mark Leckey seeks to explore some of the ways in which modern technology comes to life. Placed among the unnerving modern pieces of technology are much older artifacts, like an Egyptian cat mummy, a stone gargoyle and a Squeeze/Hug Machine, designed to calm hyper-sensitive people (that is, if youre the kind of hypersensitive person who finds being squeezed by a machine calming). These objects and machines come together with artworks by a variety of contemporary artists, in an attempt to create a thought-provoking and perhaps somewhat creepy examination of the way humans craft things that then seem to develop a life of their own.
The Universal Addressability of Dumb Things is on at the Bluecoat, Liverpool until 14 April, before travelling to the Nottingham Contemporary from 27 April to 30 June and the De La Warr Pavilion, Bexhill, from 12 July to 20 October 2013.” Exhibition Review by Socialist Review, April 2013
“The Universal Addressability of Dumb Things was part of a series of artist-curated shows organized by Hayward Touring. I was asked in 2010 and spent three years searching and gathering, putting together the show on my desktop. Once I’d decided on which things I wanted I could then ask the Hayward to try and get me the actual thing itself. So the way the show developed was by flip- flopping from the digital realm to the real world and once the exhibition actually materialised in a physical space I was left with a feeling of, not quite anti-climax, but a sense that this was to final; that these things that had been alive to me for the last couple of years were now just dead media, they’d been through all these transformations but were now somehow inert. But more importantly they had now passed out of my hands and one of the main drives in collecting all these things together was to have them within my grasp, to actually hold them and touch them. I didn’t want to give up my possession of them, and in the Modern World I don’t have to. So I scanned as many of the objects as I could and with the help of FormLabs and GBE they will be 3D printed over the month of May. This is not an exhibition in itself but the making of the next generation of the show – this one called UniAddDumThs – for WIELS, in Brussels, opening in September this year. The making is an event, a chance to see these machines in action, making the future.” Mark Leckey, 2014
Leckey’s recent exhibitions include On Pleasure Bent, Hammer Museum, Los Angeles, The Encyclopedic Palace, 55th Venice Biennale, curated by Massimiliano Gioni. The Universal Addressability of Dumb Things (all 2013) which was commissioned by Hayward Touring UK and toured; The Bluecoat, Liverpool, UK, Nottingham Contemporary, Nottingham, UK, and the De La Warr Pavilion, Bexhill-on-Sea, UK.
A Month of Making @ GBE is the production site for part of Leckey’s forthcoming retrospective exhibition Lending Enchantment to Vulgar Materials curated by Elena Filipovic, WIELS Contemporary Art Centre, Brussels (September 26, 2014 – January 11, 2015), touring to the Museo Madre, Naples (Summer 2015). Leckey also has forthcoming exhibitions at Haus der Kunst, Munich, curated by Patrizia Dander, and at Secession, Vienna in 2015.

