
Raffaella Cortese is proud to present the first solo show by Karla Black at the gallery. Karla Blackʼs work is inspired by abstract expressionism and performance art and creates a highly singular path. The artist realizes large scale sculptures combining typical art materials, such as plaster, glass, polythene and paper and everyday materials including cosmetics, soap, dirt, vaseline. In a never- ending process of experimenting, Karla Black creates with matter, by highlighting the different textures. Her works remind of some kind of performance and while they seem impermanent and formless, they are striving to keep their aesthetic intact forever in some or various ways.
For her exhibition at the gallery, Karla Black creates a series of free-standing and hanging sculptures connected by a yellow powder line. The show is basically a study in colour. The artist examines, both in terms of colour and form, how close to similarity things can be, while still managing to be utterly different. The works, while being very closely connected in terms of what they look like, reflect the way that Blackʼs work skirts between mediums while remaining resolutely autonomous sculpture. It is almost painting, almost installation, almost performance art but, always, in the end, most definitely sculpture. The artist rethinks the expressive gesture and plays with the different features of materials. In this way, she produces a cosmogony of expanded works, light and transparent ones, suspended from the ceiling, or coloured accumulations of powder and paper thickening on the floor.
Karla Black (Alexandria, Scotland, 1972. Lives and works in Glasgow.) Among the prominent institutions that presented her work: kestnergesellschaft, Hannover (2014), Gemeentemuseum, The Hague (2013); Dallas Museum of Art; Gallery of Modern Art, Glasgow; Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin (2012); Kunsthalle Nürnberg, Nuremberg, (2010); Migros Museum für Gegenwartskunst, Zurich; Kunstverein, Amburg; Modern Art Oxford; Inverleith House, Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh (2009). In 2011, she represented Scotland at the 54th Venice Biennal and she was nominated for the Turner Prize

