
For her second solo exhibition at Galerie Emanuel Layr, Lisa Holzer I am young here here will show old and new pictures.
The series Its my hair and I can do what I want with it! shows five times mainly single spaghetti. “This really great.”, “Im in love.”, “So gentle.”, “Love love this !”, and “Oh I love this one!”(blushing) are colour gradient pictures depicting different nail polish remover bottles texts as white text-stains that float upside-down at the transition between colour and non-colour. Their titles are quotes from online reviews for each of these nail polish removers. Both series stem from the sentence Its my hair and I can do what I want with it! borrowed from Tiqquns Raw Materials for a Theory of the Young-Girl, which I should have read already in 1999.
Nude monochromes naked dream, Nude monochromes naked dream (blushing soft pink), Nude monochromes naked dream with Ei passing under spaghetti and Go Blonder shampoo (blushing yellow), and Nude monochromes naked dream with Ei passing under spaghetti (blushing orange) are nude monochromes having naked dreams. I drive boy I am a slow driver
The Garage Picture is especially conceived for one room of the gallery which used to be a garage. It is mainly text. The text is in yellow and concerned with drives all drives are death drives and Lena Henkes show H. H. Bennett, Lena Henke and cars, and me and her, and is on one of Lisa Holzers old works which therefore stands on its head.
Ei passing under spaghetti and Colour passes, permeates the glass, comes out of the picture passing under Dior Dissolvant abricot and a single spaghetti both from the ongoing series The Passing are only guests to this exhibition. They will leave the 10th of July to attend another presentation in Munich.
All pictures in this show are young, young girls. Some blush. Another giggles. No one complains.
I did love you once is a Hamlet quote and the opener for Tiqquns Raw Materials for a Theory of the Young-Girl, which I should have read already in 1999.
During the opening Lisa Holzer I am young here here will cook and photograph single spaghetti against transparent milky surfaces. My hand cooking and photographing single spaghetti against transparent milky surfaces my hand against my hand against
Note: In Lisa Holzers ongoing series The Passing colour sometimes literally passes, permeates the glass, and comes out of the picture. In But yes, but yes! nail polish tries to permeate the glass to come into the picture. And in Yellow, a 2012 performance by the artist, described as On/off, glasses are touched with yellow before drinks are served, parting with colour, yellow was passed onto the audiences hands via with yellow finger paint Tactil color touched glasses of Aperol spritz.
Somehow some of the pictures in this show have coloured fingerprints on the glass surfaces of their frames matching the colours on the prints beneath. It may only be, how romantic, dirt of old works on young ones in matching dull colours you cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs. And the direction taken by the colours remains unclear. And everythings ensnarled and lumps and thus is relentlessly hopeless rather than romantic. Fuck young girls. my hand against may hand against
Lisa Holzer

