
MISAKO &amp; ROSEN is pleased and honored to announce our presentation of a solo exhibition with artist Daan van Golden. Van Golden was born (1936) in Rotterdam and presently lives and works in Schiedam, The Netherlands. A selection of Van Goldens highly considered yet extensive recent international exhibition history includes solo presentations at GEM, Den Haag (2014), Wiels, Brussels (2012), Musee dArt Moderne et Contemporain, Geneva (2009), Camden Arts Centre, London (2008), Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam (2006), Gemeente Museum, Den Haag (2001), Le Consortium, Centre dArt Contemporain, Dijon (1996) and the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam (1991). In 1999, Van Golden represented the Netherlands with a solo presentation in the Dutch Pavilion at the XLVIII Venice Biennale. The present exhibition will be Van Goldens first solo presentation in Japan since his sole solo show with Naiqua Gallery, Shinbashi, Tokyo (1964).
Daan van Golden spent the years of 1963-64 living and working in Tokyo; prior to this time, Van Golden had exhibited within the Netherlands a well regarded body of abstract, expressionistic paintings executed in a restrained palette of black and white. As Van Golden noted in a letter sent from Tokyo to Schiedam, dated February, 1964, Holland isnt Japan and this change of environs led to his development of a practice extraordinary for its distinct quality of patience. During his time in Tokyo, Van Golden created, in a deliberate and meditative manner, a series of highly formal paintings based upon the designs of Japanese cloths and department store and product wrapping paper. This marked the beginning of Van Goldens lifelong engagement with a radically creative practice of art finding. The media via which Van Golden continues to choose to present his findings includes painting, photography (notably his photographic series Youth is an Art which documents the life and international travels of his daughter Diana prior to her birth through her 18th year), found object, film, collage and, most recently, digital printmaking. The present exhibition, celebrates the return of Van Goldens work to Japan 50 years following the Naiqua Gallery exhibition and aims, in the manner of Van Goldens practice, to self reflexively explore and further a narrative rooted in the visual culture of 1960s Tokyo. Made in Tokyo will include Van Goldens recently created series of Double Prints, essentially digital collages conjoining visually work from early/late periods of his practice, ephemera including photographs, invitation cards, periodicals and other material related to his time in Japan as well as the floral patterned painting Untitled (Tokyo) from 1964. In conjunction with the exhibition, the gallery will release a companion publication Made in Tokyo; the book will include newly discovered images related to Van Goldens time in Japan as well as an original text by Tokyo based critic Andrew Maerkle. The exhibition has been made possible through the kind and generous support of the Mondriaan Fund and the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

