
The Centre d’Art Contemporain in Genève presents Robert Overby – Works 1969-1987, the first institutional survey exhibition of the artist’s work in Europe. The exhibition – curated by Alessandro Rabottini – is organized, as a travel exhibition, together with the GAMeC – Galleria d’Arte Moderna e Contemporanea Bergamo (Italy, May 16 July 27 2014), the Bergen Kunsthall (Norway, August 29 – October 19 2014) and with Le Consortium (Dijon, France, Spring 2015).
Despite his extremely prolific and diversified practice, Robert Overby remains one of the best-kept secrets of Post-War American Art, as he rarely exhibited in his lifetime. His multi-faceted artistic output – encompassing sculptures, installations, paintings, prints and collages – is a mysterious and inspiring exploration of representation, space and identity; an investigation of the human condition and its decay, beauty and absurdity.
Through both an extensive selection of works, and the exhibition layout, Robert Overby – Works 1969-1987 tries to make justice of an art practice that was visually so varied but extremely coherent and consistent from the conceptual and existential point of view. In this sense many works on view can be understood as explorations of concepts like “surface” and “skin” translated as sites of transformation, being the skin of a building, the skin of a painting as a material entity or the artificial skin of a latex mask that allows one to perform multiple sexual identities. Robert Overby’s oeuvre can thus be interpreted as a critique of “style” as a univocal and stable intention, in favor of an idea of art as an ongoing investigation of the human condition captured in a constant state of flux.
The exhibition will be accompanied by an extensive catalogue published by Mousse Publishing, including a complete chronology of the artist’s work and life as well as newly commissioned contributions by Andrea Bellini, Martin Clark, Robin Clark, Terry R. Myers and Alessandro Rabottini. (Catalogue published with the support of The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts)
The exhibition is organized with the collaboration of the Estate of Robert Overby, Los Angeles.

