
Tutta la vita is an exhibition based on an idea by Bernd Ribbeck, with works by Jan Meier, Bernd Ribbeck and Andreas Schulze.
Andreas Schulze started working in the burgeoning art scene in Cologne in the early 1980s. Right from the outset, he worked to create an original visual language of his own, in a surreal, undulating style of painting which is at once ironic and disturbing. In his painting he explores the traditional genres of art, wavering between figuration and abstraction. His works often appear in installations that recreate domestic settings, where they interact with found furniture and his own sculptures. His work has had a great influence on a younger generation of artists.
The paintings of Jan Meier portray objects that are arranged in relation to each other, first in his studio and then on the canvas, capturing all the magic and beauty that these interactions create. Even just coins or matches from his pockets can magically form a face, while swallows flying might recall starry skies.
In the form of small-format paintings and drawings, the works of Bernd Ribbeck are built up through a stratification of different materials, with acrylics and watercolours alternating with the marks of a ballpoint pen. His previous works, which were abstract geometric compositions, have now evolved into particular architectural forms, taking inspiration not so much from actual buildings as from isometric projections – graphic representations in which a geometric object is projected onto a plane.
What these three artists have in common is an ability to create a pictorial world of their own. This constitutes a code by means of which subjects appear in a form bordering between figuration and abstraction, with a visual language that questions the very significance of “representation”. One concept around which this exhibition revolves is that of a “metaphysical” vision: Ribbeck’s buildings and Meier’s interiors, like Andreas Schulze’s houses, are not places where one might imagine living. They are not part of our world, but rather spatial constructions that constitute a metaphor for creativity itself

