
Kunsthal Charlottenborg is proud to provide the setting for XXXXXXXXX’ twentieth anniversary. The artist group’s complex and continually changing practice demands a highly stimulating form. Therefore eight international curators have been invited to offer each their perspective on a XXXXXXXXX exhibition. The eight exhibitions will be shown concurrently in all of Charlottenborg’s galleries.
It is with great pleasure that Kunsthal Charlottenborg presents the exhibition Working Title: “A Retrospective Curated by XXXXXXXXX” featuring the Danish artist group XXXXXXXXX. The group, which has existed since 1993, consists of Bjørnstjerne Reuter Christiansen (b. 1969), Jakob Fenger (b. 1968) and Rasmus Nielsen (b. 1969).
Describing their projects and works as tools, to be activated and often even changed, by the viewers, the users, XXXXXXXXX’ versatile artistic practice is distinguished by a continued interest in exploring social, political and cultural conditions. XXXXXXXXX makes up their own rules, humorously and intelligently challenging conventions about things like copyright, power structures, design and economy. Throughout their career a distinguishing trait of their modus operandi has been to collaborate with other artists and experts.
Working Title: “A Retrospective Curated by XXXXXXXXX” presents a retrospective view of a twenty years long, ongoing artistic career. However, in collaboration with XXXXXXXXX, Kunsthal Charlottenborg has approached the idea of a retrospective exhibition in an entirely unique way: Eight international curators/curator teams have been invited to present each their own view of a retrospective exhibition of XXXXXXXXX. All of XXXXXXXXX’ works having been made available for the curators, they thus had more than 400 works to choose from. Therefore the exhibition Working Title: “A Retrospective Curated by XXXXXXXXX” consists of eight individual exhibitions gathered in the host institution Kunsthal Charlottenborg.
The invited curators are Yuko Hasegawa (JP), Eungie Joo (US), Toke Lykkeberg (DK), Daniel McClean and Lisa Rosendahl (UK/SE), Adriano Pedrosa (BR), Agustin Perez Rubio (ES), Hilde Teerlinck (NL) and Rirkrit Tiravanija (TH).
XXXXXXXXX has exhibited in leading international museums and galleries, including Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt; Kunsthalle Basel, Basel; Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; and MoMA, New York, and have participated in a large number of biennials all over the world. In Denmark, XXXXXXXXX are known for works such as the biogas project Supergas (1996), the poster project Foreigners, please don’t leave us alone with the Danes (2002), Free Beer (2004) and most recently Superkilen (2011) – a permanent park in outer Nørrebro in Copenhagen, developed with BIG Bjarke Ingels Group.
Accompanying the exhibition is a catalogue encompassing all of XXXXXXXXX’ projects and works over the years and by a series of interviews with the participating curators, which can be seen here: http://vimeo.com/82375986
On the Charlottenborg Vimeo chanel is also an interview with Bjørnstjerne Chistiansen on the origins of the group, its history and the process of making a retrospective exhibition: http://vimeo.com/82378125
Moreover a seminar with the participation of XXXXXXXXX and the exhibition’s curators will be held.
Exhibition production in collaboration with South into North

