
Das Tauschregal is an experiment in participatory economics. Daignault sent an open call asking viewers to trade objects of value for paintings. 31 participants were chosen anonymously and each agreed to trade one object for its painted representation.All thirty-one objects will be displayed on a shelf at 6 Decades Books, beginning on the first day of May. Each subsequent day, one painting will replace the object it depicts. At the end of the month, the shelf will hold only paintings, exchanging concrete commodity for abstract representation, as in currency. Installed concurrently with the Frieze Art Fair, Das Tauschregal suggests an alternative art market, exploring the notions of value independent of price (meaning, sentiment, aesthetics, formalism, power, influence and beauty).
Cynthia Daignault was born in Baltimore, Maryland, and currently lives in New York. She attended Stanford University, and was a MacDowell Colony Fellow in 2010. Her work was featured in a solo show at White Columns in 2011. Daignault is a recipient of the 2011 Rema Hort Mann Foundation Grant. Her first solo show at Lisa Cooley, New York opened in Fall 2013. She has published two limited edition artist books,titled CCTV (2012)and I love you more than one more day (2013),the latter on the occasion of her solo show at the gallery. Daignault will present a new body of work at Frieze New York in May 2014, and she will be included in the group exhibition, Crossing Brooklyn at the Brooklyn Museum in Fall, 2014.
6 Decades Books specializes in artists’ books, the history of the book as an artistic medium, and the documentation of the essential role these books have played in the development of contemporary art. The showroom is located at 265 Canal Street, #210 and is open Fridays and Saturday from noon-6pm, and by appointment. 6 Decades is run by Jeremy Sanders, who can be reached at (347) 766-4106 or info@6decadesbooks.com. This presentation is the second in a series of off site projects developed by Lisa Cooley and organized in collaboration with artists. The series arose from conversations with artists about exhibition possibilities outside the gallerys regular program and space. Were excited to present a number of similar projects in unexpected spaces throughout 2014.

