



The social is geographic, psyche is space, development a path. Movement in space as a metaphor for personal development, the path: a desire line.
The development of the subject, just like the path it moves on, is non-linear. According to anthroposophical thought, one begins a new phase of life every seven years, presenting a major junction each time. One sees new routes before oneself and new desires manifest. Desire paths emerge where constructed ways take a circuitous route, have gaps or are lacking entirely. GEBURT UND FAMILIE.
The path traverses an obstacle course of sculptures. Sculptures made of hand woven ropes, freely floating drawings, lines and loops. They embody mystical signs, star constellations and psychograms. They are representatives, shape shifters that remain easily identifiable. Like a family lineup, their spatial constellation epitomizes a psychograph in which attitudes and aspirations become coordinates. The balance is fragile. Likewise, their distribution in space, their relationships among each other create an equilibrium that is based on interdependences. Any displacement within these spheres shifts the balance and effects the social net as a whole.
The movement through the sculptures, channeled energy, is a desire line that allegorizes social trails. The transition is a diagram of the subject’s progress.
In addition to a new series of sculptures Lena Henke’s exhibition at White Flag Projects includes a photo love story developed in collaboration with the Sculpture Museum Glaskasten Marl, Germany, on the occasion of her forthcoming exhibition “Yes, I’m Pregnant”.



Stephanie Seidel
Curator
Kunststiftung NRW 






Lena Henke has held solo exhibitions with Real Fine Arts, New York; Neuer Aachener Kunstverein, Aachen; Galerie Parisa Kind, Frankfurt am Main; Kunstverein Oldenburg, Oldenburg; and 1857, Oslo. She has participated in group exhibitions held with Greene Naftali, New York; Pro Choice, Vienna; and the Glasgow International, Glasgow. Together with artist Marie Karlberg, Henke co- founded the itinerant curatorial project M/L Artspace, which has mounted exhibitions in such locations as a nail salon and a parking lot under the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway. Henke completed her MFA dually at at the Städelschule, Frankfurt am Main and the Glasgow School of Art, Glasgow. She lives and works in New York.

