
From March 7 to May 18, 2014, Giacomo Guidi Arte Contemporanea is pleased to present a solo show by Gianni Piacentino. The exhibition features a selection of works by the Turin artist from the 90s to today that testify the great vitality and versatility of its production in the last two decades, in addition to the presentation of a new vehicle “GP” specially made for this exhibition.
The work of Gianni Piacentino turns out to be a unique case in the Italian and international scene as an original point of contact between some of the most significant movements of the sixties and seventies, such as Arte Povera, and American Minimalism of Donald Judd, Sol LeWitt, Robert Morris and John McCracken.
Initially associated with the Arte Povera, he participated in the first exhibition of the movement at the gallery of Gian Enzo Sperone in Turin in 1966 and, in particular, “Arte Povera Piú Azioni Povere” at the former arsenal of Amalfi in 1968 and then the exhibition “Prospect ‘68” at the Kunsthalle Düsseldorf. Piacentino, however, has developed its own autonomous language disaffiliating himself from the group. The symbols or geometric forms of his earliest works, make space at first to everyday objects, and consequently, by the late ‘60s, his minimalist sculptures translate into aerodynamic shapes which tend more and more to celebrate the myth of speed and engines, the movement and dynamism of the machine.
Piacentino is an artist and also manufacturer, combines a playful approach to a maniacal perfectionism and self-discipline in the technical formal surrender in fact it was also a consultant for a manufacturer of specialty paints, designer and pilot of racing bikes and side-car.
His passion for “The Aesthetics of Technique” will become his trademark. His works are improbable objects, impossible vehicles prototypes, automobiles, motorcycles and aircraft, while metaphors of an object and constant investigation of the relationship between artistic creativity and the industrial process, the boundary between art and design. He remains a figure of great importance in virtue of originality and modernity of his vision.

