
Firstsite announces a new exhibition of work by Simon Denny (b. 1982, Auckland, New Zealand). The Personal Effects of Kim Dotcom is Denny’s first solo exhibition in the UK and features a new project inspired by the recent rise and fall of the New Zealand-based Internet entrepreneur Kim Dotcom, who was the subject of FBI investigations on charges of criminal copyright infringement in relation to his popular file-sharing platform ‘Megaupload’. In an armed raid on his mansion in Auckland in January 2012, authorities controversially seized possessions including 175 million US dollars in cash, 60 computer servers, 22 luxury vehicles, and several works of art. Denny has assembled copies, imitations and approximations of these items to form a large-scale sculptural visualisation of the inventory of objects seized from Dotcom’s home. Drawing on recent political events and wider debates concerning public access to data, Denny’s project highlights discussions around material and immaterial value, property, theft and ownership in a digital age.
The Personal Effects of Kim Dotcom is presented in collaboration with the Museum moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig Wien (MUMOK), Vienna. A new publication featuring an interview with the artist and essays by writers including MUMOK curator, Matthias Michalka, is available from Firstsite’s shop.
Simon Denny was born in Auckland, New Zealand in 1982. He studied at the Städelschule, Staatliche Hochschule für Bildende Künste in Frankfurt (2009) and at the Elam School of Fine Arts at the University of Auckland (2004). Solo exhibitions of his work have been held at MUMOK, Vienna; Kunstverein Munich (2013); Aspen Art Museum, Colorado (2012); Neuer Aachener Kunstverein, Aachen (2011); Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis, Missouri; Halle für Kunst, Lüneburg and Artspace, Sydney (2010). His work has been presented in major survey exhibitions, including the 55th Venice Biennale (2013); 16th Biennale of Sydney (2008) and 1st Brussels Biennial (2008). He was the recipient of the Baloise Art Prize at Art Basel in 2012, and will represent New Zealand at the 56th Venice Biennale in 2015. He lives and works in Berlin.
The Personal Effects of Kim Dotcom is presented alongside an exhibition of films by Aleksandra Domanovic and the exhibition Henri Chopin dans l’Essex.

