



PARTICIPANT INC is honored to present Greer Lankton, LOVE ME, an exhibition organized in cooperation with the Greer Lankton Archives Museum (G.L.A.M.). This is the first major New York solo exhibition of Lankton (1958-1996) since her death. Representing the scope of Lankton’s work with nearly 100 of Lankton’s dolls, photographs, and works on paper, LOVE ME is structured by a selection of photographs by friends and peers including Nan Goldin, Timothy Greenfield- Sanders, Peter Hujar, Eric Kroll, Zoe Leonard, Paul Monroe, Daryl-Ann Saunders, Kate Simon, and Geoff Spear; films by Joyce Randall Senechal and Nick Zedd; as well as ephemeral material.
While Lankton exhibited during her lifetime at Civilian Warfare, Gracie Mansion, the 1995 Whitney Biennial and Venice Biennale, and is fondly remembered by many for her displays in the windows of the East 7th Street boutique, Einsteins, it has been some time since her work has been exhibited in depth in New York City. Lankton remains an important figure in the history of the East Village art scene of the eighties and nineties, best known for her meticulously constructed and, in many instances, constantly evolving doll sculptures. Often discussed in terms of their autobiographical nature, her figures reflect a lifelong obsession with her own body and the simultaneous glamour and gravity she embodied as a transgendered artist living within the culture of the East Village of that period. The anticipated resurgence of Lankton’s tangible presence in New York City is particularly meaningful today, and, as Emily Colucci recently affirmed, “the retrospective is posed to resurrect Lankton’s legacy, putting her in conversation with younger artists and giving her a proper place within queer art history.”
There are numerous private collections and institutions participating in this exhibition, including the Collection of Iggy Pop; Mary Ann Unger Estate; Peter Hujar Archive, Pace/MacGill Gallery; The Estate of David Wojnarowicz, P.P.O.W.; David Wojnarowicz Papers, Redtape Archive, and Nick Zedd Papers at the Fales Library and Special Collections; Matthew Marks Gallery; Pavel Zoubok Gallery; and The Costume Institute at The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Greer Lankton (1958-1996) was born in Flint, Michigan. Lankton attended the School of the Art Institute of Chicago to study Fabrics (1975-1978) and received her B.F.A. from Pratt Institute for Sculpture (1978-1981). Upon graduating in 1981, Lankton was included in New York/New Wave exhibition at MoMA PS1 curated by Diego Cortez. Lankton exhibited at Civilian Warfare from 1983- 1985 where she had three major solo exhibitions, as well as four group exhibitions. From 1986- 1990 Lankton exhibited her work at the East Village boutique, Einsteins, where she staged multiple presentations of her sculptures. Among Lankton’s many national and international group exhibitions, she was included in The Crucifix Show at Barbara Gladstone, New York (1982); a group exhibition at Anderson Theater Gallery, New York (1983); Limbo at PS1, New York (1984); Portrait Show and a collaboration with David Wojnarowicz at Gracie Mansion, New York (1984); Am. Sculpture at Anna Friebe Galerie, Cologne (1984); Inside the East Village at Galerie Andre Emmerich, Zurich (1984); Three Person Show at T. Greathouse Gallery, featuring a Wojnarowicz and Marion S. collaboration, New York (1985); 57th Street between A &amp; D at Holly Solomon, New York (1985); Nude, Naked, Stripped at Albert &amp; Vera List Visual Arts Center, Cambridge, MA (1985), The Figure as an Image of the Psyche at Sculpture Center (1985), Painting and Sculpture Today at Indianapolis Museum of Art (1986), Witnesses: Against Our Vanishing, curated by Nan Goldin at Artists Space (1989), as well as her presentation of Mannequins of Diana Vreeland and Anna Wintour at Barneys, New York (1990). In 1992, Lankton participated in a group show, The Sexual Self at Tanja Grunert, Cologne and was included in the 1994 exhibition, Real Sex at Salzburger Kunstverein, Salzburg. In 1995, Klaus Kertess invited Lankton to exhibit at the Whitney Biennial, followed by her inclusion in the Venice Biennale, curated by Jean Clair. Lankton completed It’s all about ME, Not You, now a permanent installation at The Mattress Factory in Pittsburgh, PA, prior to her death in 1996. Since that time, her work has been included in the group exhibition East Village USA at the New Museum (2004-2005), and more recently in Ecce Homo at Pavel Zoubok Gallery (2013). In 2011, ONE National Gay &amp; Lesbian Archives in Los Angeles presented Greer Lankton: You Can’t Throw it Away, the first retrospective of her artwork, organized by Paul Monroe and G.L.A.M. Lankton is currently included in Matthew Marks Gallery’s A Drawing Show, on view through November 29, 2014.




