
Alexander Tovborg’s first major solo exhibition transforms Overgaden to a panoramic scene with ten monu- mental paintings exploring the dinosaur as a mythological creature.
Drawing on 19th century artistic aesthetics of the beautiful, the romantic and the mythological, Alexander Tov- borg crafts a picturesque universe revolving around the mythology of modern culture.
In the theatrical oval space of Alexander Tovborg’s exhibition, colourful landscapes are inhabited by dinosaurs endowed with human characteristics. The stylistic and nearly abstract works seemingly convey a story from a distant past – a story not bound by scientific precision, but rather a reflection of our human world of ideas and imagination.
With clear references to natural history museums, the ten paintings comprise a singular panoramic work in which the same dinosaur is portrayed repeatedly – with slight variations in form and colour from canvas to canvas. This repetition and variation points to the myth as a universal figure in our culture whose significance is repeated and shifts over time. By portraying existing myths about the fabled animals and adding new layers, the exhibition allu- des to the mechanisms at work in the universal human penchant for myth-making and worship.
Alexander Tovborg has developed a special technique for these new works, gluing disposable cloths to the canvas before adding thin layers of paint and scraps of canvas. The technique adds a textural, colour-saturated quality to the works, offering a take on the classic Italian frieze from a contemporary artistic perspective.
Alexander Tovborg (b. 1983) is educated at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts and Staatliche Akademie der Bildenden Künste in Karlsruhe. Tovborg has had exhibitions in both Denmark and abroad, including at the Muse- um of Religious Art, Fauna exhibition space, Gallery Nicolai Wallner and Brand New Gallery in Milano. Furthermo- re he has participated in group exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art in Dublin and the Lincoln Museum of Modern Art, among others.

