
Stage I. Frankfurt
“Magick is a foam, exfoliating the filth-sensible ordered world from the bodies of the pure of spirit. Through the sparkling froth, a gateway is opened where the acolyte enters the satisfactory realms of illusion, washing away the sweat of world-anxiety and cultural enslavement.”
 Vetjylien N’gyrz
S.O.A.P.Y is a cluster of individuals that have discovered these properties as useful escapes from an anguished history. Defined technically, it is an occult initiatory school in which varying degrees of expertise, experience, and comprehension of ur-metaphysics are recognized among members. The school practices a philosophy of self-initiation that involves the progressive refinement and improvement of itself through the theoretical study and practical application of the Black Arts, or means of mysterious skills. To others, these skills are simply known as Magick.
The term magic is etymologically derived from the Greek word mageia (μαγεία). Greeks and Persians had been at war for centuries and the Persian priests, called magosh in Persian, came to be known as magoi in Greek; that which a Persian priest did come to be known as mageia and then magika, a term which eventually referred to any foreign, unorthodox or illegitimate ritual practice. Illegitimate, foreign, and unorthodox—these are ideals to which every S.O.A.P.Y initiate aspires. Magick is the enemy of a sterile planet with its ascetic ideals.
The legend of S.O.A.P.Y goes back to a large gang of unwashed children with varying origin points from the proto-civilizations of earth. Harappa, Eridu, Sanxingdui, Minoa, and El-Badari.This band of ashen bodies gathered in the center of europe sometime in the late neolithic, finding eachother through the same interests in the practices of outer-dimensional thinking. False priests descended on these innocents, however, and guided them on arduous journies to false paradises. Most of them could not resist the exertions of these travels, dying or giving up from starvation and exhaustion, depression, and rampant substance abuse.
Others were sold into slavery, while those that survive are hunted to this day.
This year, on the alignment of several celestial bodies in favorable circumstances, a gathering of the S.O.A.P.Y takes place in Frankfurt at the New Old Bridge, a cave whose walls have been bleached with lyme.
Stage II. London | Stage III. Detroit | Stage IV. Berlin

