
Nouveau Musée National de Monaco-Villa Paloma presents the most comprehensive retrospective to date of Richard Artschwagers (1923–2013) work from February 20 until May 11.
The exhibition is organized by the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York in association with the Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, and curated by Jennifer Gross, Chief Curator and Deputy Director for curatorial affairs at the deCordova Sculpture Park and Museum, in Lincoln, Massachusetts. The NMNM’s presentation is organized by Director Marie-Claude Beaud. Following the presentation of Richard Artschwager! at Whitney Museum, New York, the exhibition travelled to the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles,and the Haus der Kunst, Munich.
Richard Artschwager! features over 135 works spanning six decades, including sculptures, paintings, drawings, photographs, and prints. Often associated with Pop, Minimalism, and Conceptual art, his work never fit neatly into any of these categories. His artistic practice consistently explored questions regarding his own visual and physical engagement with the world; his objects straddle the line between illusion and reality. The exhibition reveals the artist’s prescience in his career-long commitment to exploring the profound effect photography and technology have had in transforming our engagement with the world. His work has responded to and challenged how these media—and our experience of things as images rather than as things in themselves—have shifted human experience from being rooted in primary physical experience to a knowledge mediated by secondary sources such as newspapers, television, and the Internet.
Marie-Claude Beaud, Director of NMNM reminds that “In 1994, for the opening of the building created in Paris by Jean Nouvel for Fondation Cartier pour l’Art Contemporain of which I was Director, I chose to call on Richard Artschwager to develop the concepts of the “Patron’s Spirit”. In the spirit of a joke, I asked him to “create gold fishes and rocks for an aquarium”, to answer the idea – at first simple – to commission one or several artworks to an artist, according to his desire and inspiration. The poetry in Richard’s work, somewhere between fiction and reality, and the extreme intelligence of his vocabulary met the architect’s, the sponsor’s and my expectations. Presenting this retrospective at NMNM, after the Whitney Museum, the Hammer Museum and Haus der Kunst is therefore a wonderful opportunity for the Museum to show the work of this unique artist and to place Monaco in the circuit of the biggest museum institutions worldwide.”

