
Galeria Luisa Strina is pleased to present Pling Pling, a solo exhibition by Cildo Meireles, whose longstanding relationship with the gallery goes back several decades. Coinciding with the São Paulo Bienal, Pling Pling will explore the relationship between the sensory and the mind, politics and ethics; themes which have engaged Meireles in his practice for the last half-century. The show will present works that have never before been presented in São Paulo and will draw on Meireles’s 2013 retrospective at Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia in Madrid, which travelled to Museo Serralves in Porto, and Hangar Bicocca in Milan earlier this year.
The exhibition will include a selection of installations and a painting, spanning the artist’s entire career, from his celebrated Espaços Virtuais (Virtual Spaces) series dating from the 1960s to more recent works. The focus of the show will be the large installation work Pling Pling (2009), which was previously displayed as part of the group show “Making Worlds”, curated by Daniel Birnbaum for the 53rd Venice Biennale (2009). The work takes the form of a constructed space within the gallery consisting of six rooms each painted with a different primary or secondary colour and equipped with a video screen that displays a complementary hue. In typical Meireles style, scale and saturated colour are utilised to create a multi-sensorial experience for the viewer as they walk through the installation.
Born in Rio de Janeiro, where he still lives and works, Meireles is considered to be one of the leading figures in conceptual art, having created some of the most aesthetically and philosophically captivating works of his era. Meireles’s work takes on complex ideas with a signature frugality of expression drawing from the Neo-concrete forms of the masters of the historical Brazilian avantgarde. The tumultuous political and social history of Brazil is also fundamentally tied up in his practice, with Meireles combining the poeticism of his forbears with the grit and realism of his social experience.

