
For over a decade leading up to curating this floor of the Biennial, Stuart Comer worked in London as a curator of film and video—media that are inherently hybrid, multiple, and collaborative, and that suggest a complex relationship between the recorded past and the lived moment. The works on view on this floor are similarly heterogeneous and have been drawn together to provide a kaleidoscopic glimpse of this historical moment, a time of fundamental artistic, technological, and global transformation.
Many of the works on view here involve transpositions of one medium into another, including Dashiell Manley’s painting and video installation derived from the 1903 film The Great Train Robbery; the late Channa Horwitz’s graphical scores, which are intended to be danced or performed musically; Ken Okiishi’s painted plasma screens; and the digital magazine Triple Canopy’s installation of real, scanned, and 3-D printed artworks. In the work of the octogenarian Lebanese-born artist and writer Etel Adnan, poetry and visual art find the space and rhythm to renegotiate their conventional roles: letters become glyphs and painted forms morph into words. Such hybrid artistic practices speak to the ways in which our attention is divided among many screens and other realities, both virtual and actual, constantly moving us between different states of focus and distraction.
Identities are also manifold in this section of the exhibition. Biennial curators have long recognized that “American” art is part of a global network, and have included American artists living abroad as well as international artists who are largely based in the United States. A number of artists on this floor adopt a critical and poetic perspective on the nation, focusing on migration, circulation (of people as well as images and ideas), and labor issues. Others use the mobility of gender identity to investigate personal or political structures—Zackary Drucker and Rhys Ernst, for example, examine queer body politics through documents of their evolving relationship during their gender reassignments. In some cases, Biennial participants present exhibitions-within-the-exhibition, acting as curators or editors to disperse their own voices by communicating through others. There are also artists who work as both object-makers and performers, animating the galleries with live events. Even the changing condition of the Whitney itself—still operating in Marcel Breuer’s Madison Avenue building as it prepares to move downtown—becomes a subject here. Overall, Comer presents artists as engineers and shape-shifters, who approach the fluid relationships between images and objects, language and culture in novel ways.
Stuart Comer is chief curator of media and performance art at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. He was curator of film at Tate Modern, London, until September 2013.

