
Additional Sites:
Cuchifritos at Essex Market, 120 Essex Street, April 19 May 18, 2014
ABC NO RIO, 156 Rivington Street. April 9 May 8, 2014
This is a short-term occupation of vacant city-managed property.
Manifesto or Statement of Intent
“Artists should prepare a copy of work put into the show. There is a real risk that the Real Estate Show will be seized by police. In that event, we should be prepared to remount the show in another location.”
-Alan Moore
James Fuentes is honored to announce its forthcoming exhibition which will revisit a seminal exhibition called The Real Estate Show, which took place in 1980 at 123 Delancey Street. Organized by Colab, a group comprised of artists and activists to collectively generate exhibition opportunities, funding and resources for artists, The Real Estate Show took place in a city owned building that the organizers and artists utilized without permission from the city. The exhibition aimed to deal with what they saw as a real estate crisis in New York City for the non-wealthy, the group dedicated the exhibition to Elizabeth Mangum, an African American woman killed by police and marshals as she resisted eviction in Flatbush.
The sequence of events were as follows.
Christmas Eve, 1979; The lock was broken.
December 30, 31, 1979; installed the show.
Evening December 31, 1979; celebrated the opening of the show.
January 2nd, 1980; artists discovered the space had been padlocked by The New York City Department of Housing, Preservation and Development.
Participating artists incude but are not limited to; Anonymous, Andy Baird, Jim Casabere, Robert Cooney, Mitch Corber, Eva DeCarlo, Jan Dickson, Peter Fend, Coleen Fitzgibbon, Bobby G, Matthew Geller, Mike Glier, Ilona Granet, John Halpem, Jenny Holzer, Becky Howland, Peggy Katz, Jon Keller, Christof Kohlhofer, Gregory Lehmann, Aline Mare, Ann Messner, Scott Miller, Richard Mock, Peter Moennig, Alan Moore, John Morton, Joseph Nechvatal, Tom Otterness, Cara Perlman, Scott Pfaffman, Walter Robinson, Rhonda Ronin and the Suffolk Street Wildlife Refuge, Christy Rupp, Sandee Seymour, Teri Slotkin, John T. Spencer, Harry Spitz, Arnold Wechsler, Robin Winters, Robert Montoya, John Alex, Edit Deak, Jules Phillipe, Warren Tanner, Fred Krughoff.
Special Thanks to:
ABC No Rio Archive
ABC No Rio Collection c/o Allied Productions Inc.
ABC No Rio Collection c/o Alan Moore
Many of the works form the original exhibition will be presented, as will documentation and ephemera related to The Real Estate Show.

