
After many months of planning MANIFESTA 10 will finally open to the public on Saturday, 28 June 2014, in St. Petersburg, Russia.
Some considered the choice of St. Petersburg controversial, however Manifesta believes that engaging with Russia at this time is important and necessary. Over the coming 125 days, MANIFESTA 10 will present the art of our times, featuring some of the world’s most renowned contemporary artists, across several venues in the Hermitage Museum and at locations within the city of St. Petersburg. More than 500,000 people are expected to attend.
In the lead up many new commissions have been created and artworks installed also respond to the encyclopedic collection and history of the State Hermitage Museum. Numerous artists have also responded to the sociopolitical context of contemporary Russia. With over 50 artists participating, notable projects include Thomas Hirschhorn’s fourteen-meter high installation, in which living spaces spill out into the inner courtyard of the new General Staff Building; Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster’s operatic ensemble of handkerchiefs on a huge scale proportional to the interiors of the new modern and contemporary wing; and Rineke Dijkstra’s video portrait of a young ballerina, which memorializes St. Petersburg’s culture of dance and gymnastics. Yasumasa Morimura pays special tribute to the history of the Hermitage by recreating scenes recorded by two artists who documented “the Hermitage’s wounds” during the siege of Leningrad.
MANIFESTA 10 branches out further into the city of St. Petersburg via the performances, exhibitions, and events comprising the Public Program, curated by Joanna Warsza, and through its Education and Mediation Programs, created by Sepake Angiama. Unlooped — KINO, the official film program of MANIFESTA 10 devised by Nathalie Hoyos and Rainald Schumacher from Office for Art (Berlin), presents over seventy individual time-based (film and video) works from 1970 to the present.
The Biennial’s Education and Mediation Program provides opportunities for visitors to engage with MANIFESTA 10 and learn more about the art of today through free, guided tours and other activities. Of its anticipated 500,000 visitors, Manifesta expects up to 40,000 people will engage with its education programs: an important element of the events’ legacy.
Initiated by Manifesta and realized in collaboration with The Hermitage Museum XXI Century Foundation, a Parallel Program made up of over 60 events will take place around St. Petersburg, involving over 250 artists and cultural practitioners. A series of independent events specifically devised for, or coinciding with, the dates of the Biennial, this Program provides a platform for the local art community in order to support and promote local artistic and cultural life to regional, national, and international audiences.
Manifesta is honored to be a guest of the Hermitage Museum and the City of St. Petersburg, bringing contemporary art into one of the largest and most prestigious museums in the world.

