
Regen Projects is pleased to announce Bbreiland, an exhibition by German artist Manfred Pernice. This is the artist’s fourth solo exhibition at Regen Projects.
“Everything lies on the floor in cassettes, the light hangs low – here, also plants (crops) are looked after – a series of tests to investigate resistance. A sorting system to identify useful material – or at least in the sense of (waste) separation, to determine the value of each element. When this research is completed, it can be hung on a wall| In a small room, works of art are exposed to radiation (limits of endurance).”
And of course, this ‘matter’ also serves a good cause: 20% of the revenue benefits the ‘Bbreiland-kooperative’ which was founded on 05/15/12 (and which appears here as the courtesy of the organizer). Bbreiland’koop supports leisure facilities in Spain and southern Sweden, organizes street parties and helps young painters in the procurement of work material (canvas, linseed oil, chalk, etc.).
On view will be an updated re-staging of Pernice’s Pezzi, an exhibition first realized at Anton Kern Gallery in New York in 2012.
Manfred Pernice (b. 1963, Hildesheim, Germany) lives and works in Berlin. He studied at the College of Fine Arts in Braunschweig and the Berlin University of the Arts. Recent solo exhibitions include expo, Brandenburgischer Kunstverein, Potsdam (2014); fiat(lux) Institut d’Art Contemporain, Villeurbanne/Rhône-Alpes (2013); Der Öffentlichkeit – Von den Freunden Haus der Kunst, Haus der Kunst, Munich (2013); Brei, S.M.A.K., Ghent (2011); Tutti, Salzburger Kunstverein, Salzburg (2010); and sculpturama, Secession, Vienna (2010); among others. Pernice’s work is held in permanent museum collections worldwide, including the Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; S.M.A.K. Stedelijk Museum voor Actuele Kunst, Ghent; Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, Wolfsburg; Tate Britain, London; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Guggenheim Museum, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; and Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; among others.

