
mourning work and gardening
or out of the tail of one ́s eye
yes, we do
come on
turncoat
sunny destination
desert
selective transparency
we re-map the space
you my love and you my love and you my love
still hunger, fresh fruits
shadow of inversion
mourning work and gardening
Jutta Zimmermann
&nbsp;
“I give the name “necropastoral” to the manifestation of the infectiousness, anxiety and contagion occulty present in the hygenic borders of the classical pastoral. For all the pastoral’s shoring up of seperations, and despite the cordon saitaire it purports it erect between the unhealthy urban strife and wholesome rural peace, we must remember that the premier celebrity resident of Arcadia is Death. It is into the rural that the rich urbanities flee with their plague, and into the ‘urbs’ that rat-vessels steer with their cargoes of fleas.”
McSweeney, Joyelle. The Necropastoral: Poetry, Media, Occults. (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 2015), 3.
&nbsp;
Eric Veit (b. 1986) lives and works in New York. His work has been exhibited at Jack Hanley, New York; SpazioA, Italy; Interstate Projects, New York; Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco; Important Projects; Oakland; Queer Thoughts, Chicago; and Philadelphia Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia. He is a founder and director of Bodega, a gallery and publisher based in New York.
Dena Yago (b.1988) has presented recent solo exhibitions with Cubitt, London; Boatos Fine Art, Sao Paulo; Eli Ping Frances Perkins, New York; Gasconade, Milan; Sandy Brown, Berlin, and Tomorrow, New York. Her work has been presented as part of numerous group exhibitions including Lands’ End, Bodega, New York; A Matter of Taste, Dingum, Paris; Revelry, Kunsthalle Bern; BLOOMINGTON: MALL OF AMERICA, Bortolami, New York; Bathrobe Baden Baden, Staatliche Kunsthalle Baden-Baden. Yago’s work has been discussed in Mousse, Frieze, and Dis Magazine. She is a founding member of trend forecasting group K-HOLE, and received her B.A. from Columbia University in 2010. She currently lives and works in Los Angeles.
Jutta Zimmermann (b.1979) lives and works in Berlin. Her work has be featured at Muda Mura Muri; Vienna; Nouslesmoules, Wien; CAB, Brüssels and a solo exhibition at Galerie Lars Friedrich, Berlin.

