
And so it begins…
Bacteria (the male-killing variety)
co-evolving, controlling in new ways
Denaturalized, disrupted, dissimilar
Enter eukaryotic cells
Fluid: Sacs Fluid: Senses of Self
Generation (the spontaneous kind) Genetic (variation)
Hierarchies [obsolete]
Imagine: interspecies, intertwined,
just as scientist Lynn Margulis suggested
Kinky
living organisms
marginal, mitochondrial, magical
nascent and non-sexed. “Now do you believe me?”
O O o, o, oh
Phenomenal Parthenogenesis -&gt; Patriarchy troubled, Power disrupted
Queer
Rethink Reconsider Replicate
Secrete [rebelliously] / Merge [symbiotically] / Speculate [parasitically]
Tough and timely, Theories of Origin
upended. Come further inside; things are unruly and hopeful
Voluptuous, vascular
watery
xylem
…
Kristine Thompson
Retelling marginalized stories from science, You are a spacious fluid sac looks at nature and its common categories and phenomena (insects, plants, bacteria, weather) in order to denaturalize socially constructed understandings of individualism, gender, and sexuality. The exhibition of prints, drawings, sculptures and installation draws inspiration from parasitic insects, Jesus’s vagina, and scientist Lynn Margulis’s theory on coevolution as a way to critique Western notions of autonomy and power. The works also reference and reimagine obsolete models of science such as the theory of spontaneous generation (the theory that living organisms could be formed from dissimilar and even inanimate matter). Together, the speculative works disrupt assumed categories of classification and suggest what might be possible within new, intertwined relationships.
You are a spacious fluid sac is Candice Lin’s fourth solo exhibition with Ghebaly Gallery. Lin received her MFA in New Genres at the San Francisco Art Institute and her double BA in Visual Arts and Art Semiotics at Brown University. She primarily uses the medium of sculpture and drawing to explore issues of gender, sexuality and race within history, anthropology and science. Lin’s work has recently been exhibited at the Kadist Foundation (Paris), the Delfina Foundation (London), La Maison Populaire (Paris), and Alhondiga Bilbao (Bilbao, Spain). She has been awarded several residencies and grants including the current Artist Lab Residency at 18th Street (2015), the 2014 California Community Foundation Emerging Artist Fellowship, the Fine Arts Work Center Residency (2012), the Frankfurter Kunstverein Deutsche Borse Residency (2011), and the Smithsonian Artist Research Fellowship (2009).

