




&nbsp;

&nbsp;


&nbsp;

Samon Takahashi Anarchives | 1993 2014

All mixtapes and radioplays recorded live on various occasions: Epsilonia Radio Show Radio Libertaire Paris | OuUnPo sessions Athens Tokyo Yokohama Porto Beirut Belgrade | Radio Arte Mobile, Rome | Politique 0 Paris | Mobile Radio São Paulo | Vision Forum Stockholm Norrköping |

ITS FAB!


(ongoing)

Thoughts around 186f Kepler
In some ways the exhibition space or the fair stall is already somewhat dislocated from the city in which it exists and is linked more to past present or future incarnations of itself in other points throughout the world. Those spaces linked together create a new kind of virtuality that could be understood as a continuous interiority where one loses track of time and space. What links these spaces together is maybe the names by which we call them and perhaps also the people that we meet within them. People who might work there or be passing through those places in the same rhythm as we do.
So does 186f Kepler seek to reproduce this kind of existence and its undefined borders in a more self-conscious way? Self-conscious in the sense of proposing a critique or offering alternatives for how such a virtuality could be understood to become somehow productive in new and not yet imagined ways? Does a static architecture propose a model for an art space that is out of sync with the reality of this new world? In thinking about how it can be reconceived as a placeless kind of places, or an every/place or every/where what is it possible to gain? So in a sense, is the project attempting to replicate (in perhaps a modified way) an existing condition by seeing how its application onto an older structure transforms that structure? Or is there something else?
This collage of places would seem to talk about a different kind of world, one in which even the repetition of the same, or the noise of a kind of sensory excess still offers moments of pause or of recognition. The anonymity or flatness of the places we travel through (and seemingly do not see or hear or feel) are challenged by coincidences and contiguities of time, space, people and memory, that make it through the screen drawn in front of us, through the haze. So is kepler186f about finding/creating/making potential these moments? About linking a series of spaces throughout the world, not only by naming them as one space, or telling us that they belong to one institution, but instead by offering interventions that make potential relations/coincidences or continuities that exist in ways that we may not have even imagined? So is the time and place for production and communication intended to remain unclear? Both simultaneous and delayed? 186f Kepler becomes then a new planet from where a heightened sensibility makes it possible to observe and understand spaces thousands of miles apart as being intimately associated.
Sony Devabhaktuni &amp; Jeanne Graff

