
Bortolami is very pleased to announce our first solo exhibition with Nicolás Guagnini. On view from November 20, 2014 through January 10, 2015, the exhibition will comprise:
 Two monumental heads, each 43 x 31 x 33 inches, made from majolica-glazed stoneware reinforced with epoxy. Each head rests on four pieces of raw cedar measuring 36 x 12 x 12 inches.
 12 vitrified glazed ceramics, all aggregations of penises, ears, noses, feet, and hands, ranging from 8 x 4 x 4 inches to 20 x 14 x 51 inches. One ceramic rests directly on the floor, while the others rest on books from the artist’s library and cedar pedestals dyed with black sumi ink. The dimensions of these pedestals varies based on a 12 x 12 x 12 inch module.
 “Dickface,” a font designed with Bill Hayden, available for download for $1.00 at dickface.me
 ”Some Notes on Dickface,” a 17 x 11 inch illustrated publication, designed by Bill Hayden and produced in an edition of 1,000 copies,x with a text by the artist printed in the above-mentioned typeface. A reformatted version of this text is also printed in vinyl across three of the walls of the gallery.
Nicolás Guagnini was born in 1966 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and has lived and worked in New York since 1998. Recent solo exhibitions include Heads, Lars Freidrich Gallery, Berlin; Nicolás Guagnini: Seven, Miguel Abreu Gallery and Balice Hertling &amp; Lewis, New York; The Panel Discussion, The Tennis Match, and A Bodegon, Andrew Roth, New York; and The Middle Class Goes to Heaven, Orchard, New York. Recent group exhibitions include Bad Conscience, Metro Pictures, New York;140 Characters, Museum of Modern Art, Sao Paulo; Descartes’ Daughter, Swiss Institute, New York; A Drawing Show Curated by Dan Graham, Micheline Swajcer, Antwerp; and Notations: The Cage Effect Today, Hunter College Art Gallery, New York.
From 1997 through 2010, together with Karin Schneider, Guagnini produced films under the moniker Union Guacha Productions; their works have been screened in numerous institutions, including the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Centre Pompidou, Paris; the Jeau de Paume, Paris; and the Center for Contemporary Art Ujazdowski Castle, Warsaw. Guagnini was a founding member of the cooperative gallery Orchard, where, among other projects, he organized the exhibition September 11, 1973 (the title referring to the date of Augusto Pinochet’s coup d’etat in Chile.) A prolific writer, Guagnini’s texts have appeared in publications such as October, Texte Zur Kunst, Mousse, Kaleidoscope, and Artforum, as well as numerous books.

