
In 2015 the Gesellschaft für Moderne Kunst am Museum Ludwig is awarding the Wolfgang Hahn Prize to Michael Krebber and R. H. Quaytman. For the first time in its over twenty-year history, and without intending to made a rule of it, the prize is being awarded to two artists.
The paramount aim of the prize is to honor artists who have made a name for themselves through their outstanding and recognized oeuvre, whose work, however, has not yet received the attention it deserves in Germany and is not yet represented in the collection of the Museum Ludwig. The Gesellschaft für Moderne Kunst allocates a sum of up to 100,000 euros for the acquisition of one or more works by the award-winning artist for the benefit of the Museum Ludwig’s collection. Furthermore, the prize entails an exhibition and the issuance of a publication.
&nbsp;
The Selection
Guest juror Daniel Birnbaum, director of the Modern Museet in Stockholm, has remarked on the jury’s decision: “The discussion within the jury was quite intense, centered on current issues regarding painting today. Quaytman and Krebber, independently from one another and over many years, have each produced an autonomous oeuvre that is also quite definitive for the future of painting and serves younger generations as a point of reference. The jury’s decision is very promising—Thomas Bernhard’s theater piece Einfach kompliziert (Simply Complicated) comes to mind.”
Yilmaz Dziewior, who as designated director of the Museum Ludwig collaborated with the jury already in 2014, explained: “With Michael Krebber and R. H. Quaytman we are honoring two outstanding artistic personalities. Both artists have long explored the premises, challenges, and possibilities of painting today—a subject that for all its timeless relevance has precisely in recent years attracted increased attention. Both have made inimitable contributions to this discourse.”
Kurt von Storch, chairman of the Gesellschaft für Moderne Kunst, has commented: “It is a great honor for us to recognize two such important artists for their work and to help propel the museum’s collection into the future. The Round Table Talk and the artists’ joint exhibition aim at offering insight into the hotly discussed field of contemporary painting.”
&nbsp;
The Exhibition
Michael Krebber and R. H. Quaytman have both created new works for their joint exhibition, including those pieces that the Gesellschaft für Moderne Kunst is acquiring for the benefit of the museum’s collection: from Michael Krebber the piece MK/M 2015/05, 2015 (varnish and acrylic on canvas, 160 x 120 cm) and from R. H. Quaytman the work Preis, Chapter 28, 2014 (encaustic, silkscreen ink, gesso on wood, 50.8 x 82.25 x 1.91 cm). The acquisitions have been made possible through the generous cooperation of the artists and the Galerie Buchholz in Cologne.
The presentation of the two artists’ new works and a selection of earlier pieces by Quaytman has been conceived by Michael Krebber in coordination with R. H. Quaytman.
&nbsp;
Program on April 14, 2015:
5 p.m.: Round Table Talk with Daniel Birnbaum, Yilmaz Dziewior, Michael Krebber, R. H. Quaytman, and Kerstin Stakemeier, junior professor at the cx Center for Interdisciplinary Studies at the Munich Academy of Fine Arts, in the Museum Ludwig auditorium
7 p.m.: Award ceremony and exhibition opening at the Museum Ludwig
This Round Table Talk will serve as the basis for the publication accompanying this year’s Wolfgang Hahn Prize.
Special thanks go to the Bank Julius Bär, which is sponsoring the award ceremony evening and the publication again in 2015.
&nbsp;
Michael Krebber
From the outset Michael Krebber has been skeptical of painting, skeptical of himself as a painter, and an artist who consistently practices his search for a painting, his questioning of painterly means and the art business as an art form. Once intimately involved in the much-vaunted Cologne art scene of the 1970s to 1990s, which has since taken on mythical status, he has created a multifarious oeuvre that undermines hierarchical structures by using strategies of disclosure.
Michael Krebber began exhibiting in 1980. His most recent large solo show, Les escargots ridiculisés, took place in 2012 at the Musée d’art contemporain in Bordeaux. Previous important exhibitions include those at the Session in Vienna in 2005, the Kunstverein Braunschweig in 2000, and the Villa Arson in Nice in 1997. Krebber’s work was most recently on view in Cologne at the Kölnischer Kunstverein, in the 2008 exhibition Pubertät in der Lehre.
Born in Cologne in 1954, Michael Krebber currently also lives and works in the city and teaches at the Städelschule in Frankfurt am Main.
R. H. Quaytman
R. H. Quaytman intensively and consistently explores issues concerning painting in her work. She seeks to maintain and simultaneously disrupt painting’s absolute presence, as Quaytman put it on January 20, 2009 in an interview with David Lewis in the art magazine frieze. Since 2001 R. H. Quayman has created her paintings according to a self-devised system. On the one hand she structures her series of paintings like an author composes a book, setting up “chapters” in which she grapples with thematic and formal aspects of painting. On the other hand she has established seven variations for the size of her works. Using this consistent formal approach Quaytmann then undertakes rigorous research for each of her individual “chapters,” which then gives rise to works having a complex network of associations with historical and biographical references. For the exhibition at the Museum Ludwig Quaytman has produced a new chapter, Preis, Chapter 28.
Quaytman has participated in numerous group and solo exhibitions. With Spine, Chapter 20, the artist conceived a kind of retrospective of her own work at the Neuberger Museum of Art in New York in 2010 and at the Kunsthalle Basel in 2011. In 2011 Quaytman also participated in the Venice Biennale, followed by a solo exhibition at the Renaissance Society in Chicago in 2013. In Germany, Quaytman’s work was most recently on view in 2012 in a solo exhibition at the Museum Abteiberg in Mönchengladbach.
R. H. Quaytman was born in Boston in 1961 and lives and works in New York.

