




25 “Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink, nor about your body, what you will put on. Is not life more than food and the body more than clothing? 26 Look at the birds of the air: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they? 27 And which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his span of life? 28 And why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin, 29 yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 30 But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is alive and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you, O you of little faith? 31 Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ 32 For the Gentiles seek after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all. 33 But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.
Matthew 6:25-34
Mathew Gallery presents Nicolas Ceccaldi’s Nightmare Factory, the artist’s first solo exhibition with the gallery, where the public is invited to contemplate a number of dolls which hang down from the ceiling, beneath a large black dome. These childlike figures, due to the fact that they are dolls, are dead weight devoid of life and therefore derive their only force from gravity itself, in perfect obedience to the laws of nature. In its form and content, the present exhibition equally showcases submission to the laws of mechanical necessity and investigates this encounter through the creative act:

 The creature cannot not obey, but is free to choose whether or not to desire compliance and accept G_d.
 Certain actions become impossible while others are accomplished through the creature without its own knowledge.
 The creature is held in a permanent state of levitation
 G_d accompanies the creature through its free fall, this moment loops forever






