
The Divorce Court: Johnson vs. Rodgers, Season 16, Episode 62, November 26, 2014 
“We both have iPhones, and we both have emojis. Now, I feel like certain emojis shouldn’t just get sent to anybody. I’m referring to emojis with the heart eyes, blowing a heart kiss, whatever have you. Even the eggplant that some people refer to as male genitalia, I don’t care. It shouldn’t be used in certain contexts.”
“There’s an eggplant?”
“Yes, an eggplant emoji. But it’s referred to as male genitalia in conversations.”
￼Esra Canoğulları (b. 1990) lives and works in Oakland, ￼California. After receiving a BFA from California ￼College of the Arts in 2013, Canoğulları has ￼participated in Yerba Buena Center for the Arts Bay ￼Area Now 7, Doubt It / Talk Series at n/a gallery and ￼has had various screenings in the Bay Area including ￼(Re)visions Festival in Oakland. Canoğullarıs work ￼focuses on creating diasporic fantasy space through ￼sculpture, video, sound and garments.
￼Nicholas Andre Sung is a multi-disciplinary artist ￼concerned with ontology, failure, sentimentality and ￼queer phenomenology. Their work has been included ￼in shows internationally and across the United States. ￼They are the director and curator of n/a, an ￼independent art space in Oakland, California, that ￼provides exhibition, event, and residency ￼opportunities.



Woof woof Puppies Puppies woof woof woof, woof woof woof woof. Woof, woof woof woof woof woof woof woof woof woof, woof woof woof woof woof, woof woof woof woof. Woof woof, Woof Woof woof Woof, woof Woof Woof woof woof woof woof. Woof woof woof woof woof.



Sydney Shen (b. 1989) lives and works in New York, NY. Her work was recently exhibited at Springsteen Gallery (Baltimore), American Medium (Brooklyn), Hester (New York), and Minibar (Stockholm). She is in upcoming group exhibitions at Fused Space (San Francisco) and Derek Eller (New York). Shen is co-author of Perfume Area, a book of prose newly published by Ambient Works (New York).






Simon Dybbroe Møller (born 1976 in Aarhus, Denmark) lives and works in Berlin. Dybbroe Møller studied at the Städelschule Academy of Fine Art in Frankfurt am Main and at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. He has had solo exhibitions at Laura Bartlett, London; Objectif Exhibitions, Antwerp, Andersons Contemporary, Copenhagen; Hyundai Gallery, Seoul; Francesca Minini, Milan; Fondazione Guiliani, Rome; C1 Kunstalle, Göppingen. His work has been included in group exhibitions at Museum Folkwang, Essen; Bregenzer Kunstverein, Bregenz; Kunstverein, Hamburger Kunsthalle, Hamburg; Museum of Contemporary Art Detroit (MOCAD); CCA Wattis, San Francisco; ZamekCastle, Poznan; Centre Pompidou, Paris; Extra City, Antwerp; Museum Ludwig, Cologne. Upcoming solo shows include The Other Space, Andersens Contemporary, Copenhagen and 21er Haus, Vienna (both 2015) and Kunsthalle Sao Paulo (2016).

