
Esther Schipper is pleased to present the sixth solo exhibition of Christoph Keller with the Gallery.
Entitled Grey Magic, the exhibition brings together themes from Keller’s ongoing Aether project, his engagement with fringe science and mediumistic ideas. As a point of departure, Keller takes the exchange of ideas that took place between scientists, philosophers, artists, writers, actors and other creative types, who mingled in Berlins 1920s Bohême circles, such as Paul Scheerbart, Raoul Hausmann and Georg Grosz. At that time, a theory dealing with ‎a kind of eccentric sensation was propagated by Ernst Marcus, which the artist has made an integral part of this exhibition. The 1922-novel by Salomo Friedlaender/Mynona entitled “Grey Magic”, which is based on Marcus theory lends the exhibition its name. The theory locates human perception outside the body, eradicating the difference between the external object and our perception of it. Eccentric sensation claimed a fluidity of boundaries between the perceiving subject and the world, stipulating a dissolution of the self and the mediating force of aether.
‎In Grey Magic, the artist combines sculptural interventions with the setting for staging an psychological experiment, other sculptural works and a series of new prints. A large-scale mirror installation unites both rooms of the gallery and sensorial experiment Mental Radio requests visitors to take part in a psychological test involving telepathical image transference.
After Aether – de la cosmologie à la conscience at the Centre Pompidou, Paris (2011) and Small Survey on Nothingness at the Schering Stiftung, Berlin (2014), Grey Magic is the third exhibition in which Christoph Keller further conceptualizes the notion of aether.
Christoph Keller, born 1967 in Freiburg/Breisgau, studied Mathematics, Physics and Hydrology in Freiburg, Berlin and Santiago de Chile, as well as liberal arts and film at the University of Arts, Berlin and at the Academy of Media Arts, Cologne. Selected solo exhibitions and projects include: Small Survey on Nothingness, Schering Stiftung, Berlin (2014); Expedition Bus–Shaman Travel, abc, Berlin (2012); Aether–between cosmology and consciousness, Nouveau Festival du Centre Pompidou, Paris (2011); Voyages Extraordinaires, CRAC Alsace Lorraine, Altkirch (2010) and Observatorium, Kunstverein Braunschweig (2008). The artist lives and works in Berlin.

