
Peder Lund is pleased to announce its second exhibition with the late French-American artist Louise Bourgeois (1911- 2010). Until her death at the age of 98, Bourgeois continued to create new bodies of work with her characteristic visual language. Throughout her 70-year-long artistic career, she cultivated a consistent vocabulary of forms and motifs, expressing aspects of her own personal history and recurring themes such as marriage, motherhood, sexuality, femininity, and domesticity. Moving freely between abstraction and figuration, Bourgeois produced work in media including drawing, painting, textile, sculptures in numerous materials, as well as installations and performances. The exhibition Louise Bourgeois: Late Work at Peder Lund will feature fabric sculptures, fabric prints and watercolours from the last decade of the artist’s life. The exhibition opens 31 January and continues through 25 April 2015.
The female body and motherhood were themes that occupied Bourgeois unrelentingly, and the pregnant woman became a key figure in her devotion to transform her thoughts and emotions into form and colour. Louise Bourgeois: Late Work centres on the organic form of the female body, and its references to nature. Two steel and textile sculptures and a fabric print of a pregnant woman suggest the complex relationship between a mother and child. Bourgeois’ works in fabric also allude to her own upbringing surrounded by textiles in her parents’ tapestry restoration workshop. Drawing and printmaking were also an important part of Bourgeois’ practice, and she considered her graphic works a natural extension of the three-dimensional objects and forms she sculpted. The blue abstract lines in a series of nine watercolours are reminiscent of the bulbous shapes seen in the artist’s marbles, installations and wearable pieces. The blue watercolours present the same charged shapes in a state of peace, meditation and escape. In a larger watercolour the shapes form a mountainous landscape in sharp blue, red and pink colours.
Bourgeois was born in Paris and studied Mathematics at the Sorbonne University, Philosophy at the University of Paris, Art History at the École du Louvre, and Fine Arts at the École des Beaux Arts. She studied under Fernand Léger in the 1930s before she married the art historian Robert Goldwater and moved to New York in 1938. Her 1982 retrospective Louise Bourgeois at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, was the museum’s first ever retrospective of a female artist. The exhibition revealed a diverse sculptor who mastered a complex variety of materials including marble, bronze, latex, fabric and mirrors. Since then, Bourgeois has been considered the most important female artist of our times. An extensive retrospective of her work opened at Tate Modern, London, in 2007, and travelled to Centre Pompidou, Paris, the Guggenheim Museum, New York, the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, and the Hirshorn Museum &amp; Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C., through May 2009. In 2011, the exhibition Louise Bourgeois: The Return of the Repressed opened at Fundación Proa, Buenos Aires, and travelled to Instituto Tomie Ohtake, São Paolo, and Museo de Arte Moderna, Rio de Janeiro. Bourgeois’ work has been exhibited extensively, and is to be found in the world’s most important public collections, including Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, NY; Bibliothèque Nationale de Paris; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; the Guggenheim Museum, New York, NY, and Bilbao; Kunstmuseum Basel; Kunstmuseum Bern; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, NY; Moderna Museet, Stockholm; Mori Art Museum, Tokyo; Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid; Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY; The National Museum of Art, Architecture and Design, Oslo; Tate Modern, London; The State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg; Uffizi Museum, Florence; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, NY. The retrospective Louise Bourgeois: I Have Been to Hell and Back opens at Moderna Museet in Stockholm 14 February 2015. With its 105 artworks, the exhibition is the largest display of Bourgeois’ work in Scandinavia to date. The exhibition travels to Museo Picasso Málaga in June 2015.

