
Painting with history in a room filled with people with funny names 3 is the epilogue to a series of works created during the past four years, about the making of a painter. In the present world, where reality and fiction merge together to form diverse paradigms, Korakrit Arunanondchai develops his character: a Thai denim painter. His autobiography, his constructed image as an artist, the social realities of present-day Thailand, and the phenomenon of globalization are mixed together in the exhibition to form what the artist calls “a memory palace.”
The installation is made in two parts. “The Body” is composed of a large denim body painting, only visible in its entirety from a bird’s eye view. It functions as a landscape and a stage for the audience. “The Spirit” presents a video, in the artist converses with Chantri the invisible main character of the trilogy and the incarnation of the audience and Korakrit Arunanondchai’s consciousness, voiced by Chutatip Arunanondchai.
Korakrit Arunanondchai looks to the Buddhist and Animist framework of Thailand, as well as to popular culture, geopolitics and technology, to question what it means to be an artist today, while celebrating connectivity, the merging of art and life, of fantasy and reality, of science and incorporeality.
“Chantri, I think I finish my final painting, will you come to see it?”
This text is based on an interview with the artist.
The lighting and design of this exhibition was created in collaboration with Alex Gvojic. The music was produced by Harry Bornstein. Special thanks to Matthew Taber for producing the exhibition, Rory Mulhere for filming, Bangkok City City gallery for co-producing the video, and Korapat Arunanondchai and Boychild for appearances.
Biography
Korakrit Arunanondchai left Bangkok to attend the Rhode Island School of Design (2009) and Columbia University (2012). After having partaken in numerous group exhibitions (Sculpture Center, New York; ICA, London), Korakrit Arunanondchai conceived his own personal exhibitions notably at MoMA PS1 (New York, 2014) and The Mistake Room (Los Angeles, 2014). He is represented by Clearing (New York, Brussels) and Carlos/Ishikawa (London).
At the invitation of The Absolut Company, Korakrit Arunanondchai takes over the ”Point Perché” platform in the heart of Palais de Tokyo. This rather strange platform is a focal point for all Events as it lends itself to concerts, performances, meet-ups, etc. Korakrit Arunanondchai’s exhibition provides an opportunity to incorporate the Point Perché, which the artist refers to as “The Spirit”, quite significantly into the itinerary of a major monographic exhibition, while maintaining its independence.

