
MoMA PS1 presents the largest U.S. museum solo show of Berlin-based artist Simon Denny (b. 1982, Auckland, New Zealand). The exhibition includes over 80 recent works, including 50 flat works, 15 sculptural works, and several mixed media installation environments, many of which will be exhibited for the first time in the U.S. The exhibition will be on view at MoMA PS1 from April 3 September 7, 2015.
The Innovators Dilemma adopts the architectural typology of the industry tradeshow, staging literal platforms for content drawn from various recent bodies of Denny’s work. Drawing its title from Clayton M. Christensens 1997 book of entrepreneurial theory, the exhibition will include Dennys projects created around the 2012 Digital Life Design conference in Munich (ALL YOU NEED ISDATA? [2012]), the Internet copyright infringement scandal involving Internet entrepreneur Kim Dotcom (The Personal Effects of Kimdotcom [2013]) and Samsungs 1993 international announcement of supposedly watershed business practice shifts (New Management [2014]), among others.
Denny’s work often refers to the psychology and abstract language of the new media economy, invoking clouds of big data and the constant pressure to update” our lives. He typically finds the sources for his work within the materials, advertising, and packaging produced by technology and media companies, and often deploys graphic interfaces borrowed from commercial display to highlight connections between the utopian goals of the new media economy and those of historical modernism.
April 3rd Open House: Simon Denny X Genius
On the occasion of the exhibition’s opening April 3rd, Simon Denny is collaborating with internet annotation startup Genius, expanding upon his exhibited work’s engagement with the cultural space and imagery surrounding technology. The opening party will feature a real-time multi-user domecast of Genius Live Annotation in MoMA PS1s VW Dome, and will preview the new Genius (Beta) annotation platform, with a panel of annotators battling to add images and commentary to key texts about innovation. The battle will be soundtracked by Galcher Lustwerk and accompanied by a signature cocktail, and will debut new, limited-edition Simon Denny x Genius lanyards.
ABOUT THE ARTIST
Simon Denny (b. 1982, New Zealand) lives and works in Berlin. After completing his BFA at Elam School of Fine Arts in Auckland, he graduated with a Master’s Degree from Städelschule in Frankfurt in 2009. In his works he explores theories of information, communication and commodification in a technologically driven world. His prolific multi-media work incorporates video, sound, media production, business models, and screens, examining the relationship of technological growth to cultural dominance. Re-contextualizing various models of modernization, such as the television, Denny’s work combines sculpture, performance, and media to address the world’s “relentless need for innovation.”
Denny has participated in a number of international solo exhibitions including shows at Portikus, Frankfurt (2014), Museum Moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig Wien (Mumok), Vienna (2013); Kunstverein München, Munich (2013), Aspen Art Museum, Aspen (2012), Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis (2010) and Artspace, Sydney (2010), among others. Group shows include Hamburger Bahnhof Museum für Gegenwart, Berlin (2013), Institute of Contemporary Arts, London (2012), Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin (2011), Musée d’Art Contemporain de Bordeaux, Bordeaux (2011). Denny has also shown at SCAPE Art &amp; Industry Biennial, Christchurch, New Zealand (2007), and the 2013 Venice Biennale, 55th International Art Exhibition, Venice. Denny He was nominated for the Preis der Nationalgalerie für junge Kunst in 2013 and received the Waikato Art Award in 2005.
This year he will represent New Zealand at the 56th International Venice Biennale. On view May 9—November 22, 2015, Denny’s project, Secret Power, will address the intersection of knowledge and geography in the post-Snowden world. Inhabiting two spaces—the terminal at Marco Polo Airport and the Marciana Library in Piazza San Marco—both locations were chosen for their status as sites of convergence that successfully operate between national borders and architecturally mix languages of commercial display with historical representations of the value of knowledge.
Organized by Peter Eleey, Curator and Associate Director of Exhibitions and Programs, MoMA PS1, with Jocelyn Miller, Curatorial Assistant, MoMA PS1.

