



Charlemagne Palestine is a Gesamtkünstler or ‘total artist’. For forty years he has been working across disciplinary boundaries as a musician, composer, performer and visual artist. Now, with the show GesammttkkunnsttMeshuggahhLaandtttt, Kunsthalle Wien offers for the first time a comprehensive overview of his diverse and complex work. Early video works, stuffed animal sculptures, paintings, installations and musical scores combine into an extensive installation. At its centre is a Bösendorfer Imperial, the instrument on which Palestine “performs” his compositions.
Since the end of the 1960s Palestine has created numerous works, both provocative and unusual, and staged an equal number of happenings. In his early years, he collaborated with choreographer Simone Forti and artists Tony Conrad and Richard Serra, and performed alongside avant-garde artist La Monte Young, and the composers Terry Riley, Philip Glass and Steve Reich. Following a period influenced by intensive shamanistic compositions and performances, in recent years his artistic efforts have again focused on “stuffed animals” (cuddly toys), which Palestine regards as shamanistic totems and has used since the beginning of his artistic career.
Charlemagne Palestine (* 1947) lives and works in Brussels. He has released more than twenty solo albums and has performed all around the world in the last forty years. His work has been exhibited internationally at public and private institutions including: Venice Biennale, Italy; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; The Museum of Modern Art, New York; Moderna Museet, Stockholm; Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; Long Beach Museum of Art; Museum of Contemporary Art, Houston; Palais des Beaux-Arts, Brussels; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Documenta 8, Kassel; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Art Institute of Chicago; Centre d’Art Contemporain, Geneva; Musée d’Art Contemporain, Montreal; and WIELS, Brussels. In 2014, he participated in the Whitney Biennial and performed with Simone Forti at MoMA in New York and at the Louvre in Paris.




