
Susanne Vielmetter Los Angeles Projects is pleased to announce Forest, our first solo exhibition with William Pope.L opening on October 23, 2015. This exhibition will feature paintings and sculptures in an architectural installation surveying the artists object-based practice from the mid-1990s through the present. A simultaneous solo exhibition, Desert, at Steve Turner will present a new film, Obi Sunt, about the ghost of Joe Gans, the first African American World Boxing Champion, and the mythology that surrounds the resurrection of a past through biography. The exhibitions will be accompanied by a GPS driving tour of the space in between the Forest and the Desert, Susanne Vielmetter Los Angeles Projects and Steve Turner. A walking tour, led by Los Angeles artist, Jimena Sarno, exploring similar themes will leave from Susanne Vielmetter Los Angeles Projects on November 7, 2015.
William Pope.L is a visual and performance-theater artist and educator who makes culture out of contraries. He has been making multidisciplinary works since the 1970s, and has exhibited internationally including New York, London, Los Angeles, Vienna, Montreal, Berlin, Zurich, and Tokyo. He is a featured artist in the book Intersections edited by Marci Nelligan and Nicole Mauro, and Darby Englishs How to See a Work of Art in Total Darkness. He participated in the New Museums 2010 2011 exhibition The Last Newspaper with a reenactment of his infamous Eating the Wall Street Journal performance. In 2011, the Museum of Modern Art in New York invited Pope.L to participate in their FluxKit project. He is the recipient of the 2012 Joyce Foundation Award to create Pull! a large-scale public project presented through Spaces Gallery, Cleveland, OH. In 2013 he created the performance / film project A Long White Cloud at Te Tuhi, Auckland, New Zealand, and presented the solo exhibitions Colored Waiting Room at Mitchell-Innes &amp; Nash, NYC; and Forlesen at The Renaissance Society, Chicago, IL, which also published the accompanying 2014 monograph Pope.L: Showing Up to Withhold. His work was presented as part of the 2014 exhibitions Ruffneck Constructivists at the University of Pennsylvanias Institute of Contemporary Art and Radical Presence: Black Performance in Contemporary Art at Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, MN; and in the solo exhibitions Claim at Littman Gallery, Portland, OR, and Gold People Shit in their Valet, at Galerie Catherine Bastide, Brussels, Belgium. The Geffen Contemporary at MOCA, Los Angeles, CA, presented his 2015 solo exhibition William Pope.L: Trinket.

