
STAGE IV. NEW YORK
I felt pleasantly empty and untouched by everything around me. I put my legs up and leaned back, the best way to feel the true well-being of seclusion. The dark cloud in my mind arose again, a true feeling of discomfort.
(Tears) The beast appears.
This beast that devours my dreams and sucks my blood, it’s a lying beast that is more cunning than others. It poses as a human even though it has no understanding of the human heart. It eats even though it never experienced hunger and studies even though it never had interest in academics. It seeks friendship even though it does not know how to love. It sees himself as the one arising, climbing over the mountain.
There was no hope on the battlefield, my spine straight and unyielding as I stood exasperated over the crushed bones of my friend, blood mingled with tendons no longer comprehensible in their purpose or constitution. Caked up blood clogged my left nostril as warm breath pulsed through the right.
I felt an unfulfilled desire and craving as far as my thoughts could reach. I laid with open eyes in a state of utter absence from myself and felt deliciously out of it.
In his late years Soapy lived a simple life, playing games and other activities. After his death, the physician who practiced his autopsy stated that her body did not contain a single drop of blood; his heart was the size of a peppercorn; his lungs corroded; his intestines rotten and gangrenous; she had a single testicle, black as coal, and her head was full of water.
It has been suggested that Soapy was born physically and mentally disabled, and disfigured. Possibly through affliction with mandibular prognathism, she was barely able to chew. Her tongue was so large that her speech could barely be understood, and she frequently drooled. She obviously suffered from the endocrine disease acromegaly, or her inbred lineage may have led to a combination of rare genetic disorders such as combined pituitary hormone deficiency and distal renal tubular acidosis.
Toward the end of her life Soapy’s fragile health deteriorated and she became increasingly hypersensitive and strange, at one point demanding that the bodies of her family be exhumed so she could look upon the corpses. Beyond physical and mental disability, soapy was diagnosed with a demonic possession (the demonic beast) which is known in modern medicine as compulsive disorders. She officially retired when she had a nervous breakdown caused by the amount of pressure put on her to lead her fellowers.
In chapter IV (New York), Soapy the bewitched majesty must win three games in the preliminary rounds of the professional exam to advance to the final rounds. In order to do that, she has to face characters that are introduced as gamblers. After the last episode, Soapy felt intimidated.

