
Dan Perjovschi, born in 1961 in Sibiu (Romania), is one of the major international artists working today. He represented his home country at the International Biennale of Venice in 1999 and has had exhibitions at the Tate Modern (2005), MoMA (2006), WIELS (2007) and the Cité nationale de l’histoire de l’immigration in Paris (2014). His work belongs to important public collections such as CNAP, MoMA, Museum Ludwig
After studying art he began his career as a newspaper illustrator, making editorial drawings for independent newspapers such as Revista 22, where he is still an active contributor. In parallel he created free publications, in the post-Communist environment of Romanian intellectuals.
Perjovschi saw the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989 as a trauma and it pushed him to abandon the limits imposed by the printed media. Suddenly his drawings began to appear on all kind of supports : walls, windows, tables, sidewalks. The artist presents his creations wherever he can draw them.
His work can exist in every given context, and he wants them to be a direct reaction to the environment where they are presented. Interacting with the viewer, to fade away into a mass of images surrounding them, or disappearing under the footsteps of the passer-by who does not even notice them.
Free from any media constraint, he takes the actuality as his source of inspiration. Highlighting selected important issues, he paraphrases global history and everyday life in an ironic way. His site-specific interventions are so powerful, because they’re ephemeral – they are a comment on a precise moment. The ‘here and now’ is Dan Perjovschi’s main occupation. His drawings are directly confronted with reality and they are a sweet but often also a bitter comment on the world surrounding us.
“Reality” is clearly the main theme of Perjovschi’s work. The simple and direct lines in his drawings create a space for a satirical approach of the present and
of conflicts with a worldwide impact. Socially engaged, he talks to us about capitalism, religion and problems of power and ego where we are confronted with on a daily basis. Some drawings are repeated over and over again to accentuate the fact that certain problems of our post-modern society seem never to be solved.
The same questions are asked all the time, and their echo is a sarcastic proof of the “unbearable lightness of being” because it’s clear that we’re victims of an internal struggle and that we keep turning around. Dan Perjovschi is conscious of this when he cites Cioran, stating that “To be is to be cornered” (Cioran, écartèlement, Gallimard, 1979).
Answering the invitation of guest curator Hilde Teerlinck, Dan Perjovschi decided present in MAGASIN past installations (dating from 1991 &gt; 2014), and a site-specific intervention. They take in consideration the specific historical and geographical context of MAGASIN as well as the history of Grenoble as birthplace of the French Revolution. With PRESSION LIBERTÉ EXPRESSION Perjovschi introduces a new slogan, his own unique manifesto of artistic values and contemporary creation.

