
C L E A R I N G is pleased to present Aaron Garber-Maikosvka first solo exhibition with the gallery.
Within the animist belief system of Indigenous Australians, a songline, also called dreaming track, is one of the paths across the land (or sometimes the sky) which mark the route followed by localised ‘creator-beings’. The paths of the songlines are recorded in traditional songs, stories, dance, and painting. When Aaron Garber-Maikovska sets out to make a video he packs a van with equipment and a cameraman, leaves his studio in Gardenia, LA and heads East. He drives in search of frontiers between the urban landscape and the Californian desert, a spot where he can position himself, center of a makeshift stage, surrounded by the attributes suburbia, and record himself forging a new song, story and dance. Every video is shot in a different location and form a sort of mapping of the Inland Empire around Los Angeles.
The video that Garber-Maikovska shows at C L E A R I N G was filmed nearby a highway road-side sign advertising the hardware store Lowes in Chino, CA. The sign is elevated on top of a brick wall, the highway and the sprawling city behind it. Garber-Maikovska positioned himself at the corner of this sign and used 4 fixed cameras to record his performance. His movements and ow of verbal interjections that form a primal language may seem random, but there is clearly purpose to his actions. The performance is not scripted but the phantasmagorical gestures are practiced and deliberate; those of a Shaman casting a spell and of an artist vigorously painting (in absence of paint).
Aaron Garber-Maikovska (b. 1978, Washington, D.C) lives and works in Los Angeles. Recent solo presentations of his work have been held at Standard (Oslo), Norway; Green Exhibitions, Los Angeles; Green Gallery, Milwaukee; and ltd los angeles, Los Angeles. Recent group exhibitions include 1,000 Islands, Simon Lee, Hong Kong; The Space Between Us, Fahrenheit (FLAX Foundation), Los Angeles; A Topography of Chance, Fused Space, San Francisco; and Unfinished Season, Nagel Draxler, Cologne.

