




American artist Martha Rosler is known for her critical engagement with the field of documentary photography, as well as for her work on cities and the relationship between urbanism, wealth, and poverty. She explored these issues in her 2011 book, Culture Class, paying special attention to the role that artists play in the changing demographics of neighborhoods facing the pressure of gentrification.
Galerie Nagel Draxler is pleased to present GREENPOINT, Rosler’s first exhibition that explicitly connects her interventions into documentary photography with her concern for the changing face of the 21st century city. Featuring works that span more than two decades, the exhibition focuses on the social and economic transformation of Greenpoint, Brooklyn — the New York neighborhood in which she has lived since the mid-1980s.
The exhibition comprises three projects:
The Garden Spot of the World: Greenpoint, Brooklyn in Traffic, Transit, and Flow, 1993
Installation with computer animation transferred to video, maps, books, photographs, and text
In this project Rosler presents a tour of Greenpoint’s history and its toxic hazards, with books suggesting how to fight polluting industries.
Greenpoint Project 2011
This work about the ongoing gentrification of Greenpoint consists of eight composite im- ages. Rosler portrays residents of mostly immigrant backgrounds, from different eras and countries of origin. Photos of people and places are accompanied by short descriptions based on conversations with shop and restaurant owners and other people working in Greenpoint.
Greenpoint New Fronts 2015
Presented here for the first time is a new series of 21 large and 10 smaller images taken in Greenpoint in the latter half of 2015. They represent a further look at the neighborhood af- ter the changes Rosler documented in 2011. The series shows the accelerated pace of gentrification after the financial and housing crisis of 2008 began to resolve itself. As rents are dramatically increasing, older businesses disappear, making way for newer ones which cater to the tastes of the area’s younger and wealthier residents.





