
Galerie Barbara Weiss is delighted to present an ensemble of recently created bronze sculptures in the forthcoming solo exhibition of the Turkish artist Ayşe Erkmen (*1949). Individually patinated in bright colors, the sculptures are dispersed in an open arrangement on the black industrial parquet of the gallery, forming a landscape of little hills in strong contrast with the floor. The title of each sculpture is assembled via a color code from the Pantone system and the ancillary “not the color it is”. This addition refers to the process in which the bronzes are given their final appearance, passing through different shades and leaving the outcome in limbo until the final station. Therefore each sculpture stands on its own, while being held part of the whole ensemble by the shared part of the title.
Accompanying the sculptures is a film depicting a location from their manufacturing process – an acid basin. Slowly a colorful liquid sways from one edge of the image to the other, reflecting neon lights give a vague impression of an industrial setting. Erkmen here creates an abstract image and playfully elaborates on the space between ordinary technical processes and the realm of art.
During the past 20 years Ayşe Erkmen gained recognition for her extensive and site-specific works. Her practice is characterized by visual clarity and a sensitivity towards the conditions at hand. The artist employs color, form and sound to question and emphasize perception and experience. In her installations Erkmen frequently responds to a given context in a social, architectural or political manner.
Ayşe Erkmen ́s work had been the subject of many solo exhibitions in renowned institutions, among them The Barbican, London (2013); Turkish Pavillon at the 54th Venice Biennial (2011); Hamburger Bahnhof – Museum für Gegenwart, Berlin (2008); Sculpture Center, New York (2005); Kunstmuseum St. Gallen (2003). Currently numerous new works are included in an exhibition at SMAK, Ghent and a new installation is on view at the Contemporary Austin.

