

Portikus is pleased to present Model Malady, an exhibition by Swiss artist Shahryar Nashat. Within his artistic practice, the artist uses means and ways to steer or interrupt the contemplative gaze, thereby directing the focus on the unheeded, the unsolicited. To achieve this, the artist resorts to various media such as video, photography and sculpture.
The core of his upcoming exhibition Model Malady at Portikus is composed of two new works: Present Sore (2016) and Chômage Technique (2016).
Present Sore is a video work, a composite portrait of the 21st-century body mediated by substances both organic and fabricated. Commissioned by Portikus and the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, it is temporarily streamed on the Walker Online Channel, and will now be presented as an installation in Frankfurt. In Present Sore, we see the human body not as a whole, but only in detail—like a close-up of the knee or the hand. The focus is on fragments, showing the mechanical moving “parts” of the body and isolating their function as tools.
Chômage Technique is a new group of sculptures that Nashat created for Portikus and the forthcoming Walker exhibition. Consisting of plinths resting on lounging display structures that the artist says are designed for them to “relax”, those obsolete pedestals have no artwork or body to support anymore. They become like laid-off workers, with complimentary front row seating for Present Sore, so that they can enjoy watching the video and its digital depiction of the bodies they would once have supported.
Shahryar Nashat (*1975) lives and works in Berlin. Nashat has represented Switzerland at the 51st Venice Biennale (2005). He was invited to take part in the 54th Venice Biennale (International Art Exhibition, 2011) and the 8th Berlin Biennale (2014). He has exhibited his work in museums such as Tate Modern, London, Centre Pompidou, Paris and Kunsthaus Zurich. Next solo presentations take place at Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin (2016) and at the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis (2016).


