
The Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago presents Kathryn Andrews: Run for President, the first solo US museum exhibition of the artist’s work. For this exhibition, Andrews situates her work against the conceptual and pictorial backdrop of a fictitious presidential election. She uses materials such as brightly painted Currier &amp; Ives images taken from historical political campaigns, and famous props from Hollywood movies such as the costumes worn by Tobey Maguire in Spider-Man and Jack Nicholson in Batman, to create a loose narrative around candidates, campaigns, sitting in office, and the end of presidency. With massively-scaled photomurals, which appropriate images such as Sammy David Jr. with President Richard Nixon and Bozo the Clown running for president, the exhibition provides an immersive experience that charts the rise and fall of the president. Run for President is on view November 21, 2015 to May 8, 2016, and is curated by Julie Rodrigues Widholm, former MCA Curator and current Director of the DePaul Art Museum.
With their lively colors and reflective surfaces, many of the works literally reflect the viewer and the surrounding environment. Andrews, who is deeply interested in contemporary culture, examines how image producers—such as artists, corporations, Hollywood studios, and politicians who mirror and shape social values at large—employ visual cues and material packaging to elicit desire. Her sculptures often contain multiple layers of meaning and reference the aesthetics of pop art, minimalism, and conceptualism.
In complement to the conceptual themes of the exhibition, each of the wall-sized photomurals serve as a backdrop, conjuring new and different connotations from the works of art in their proximities. In addition to Sammy Davis Jr. and Bozo the Clown, there is a photomural of Mr. T with Nancy Regan at the White House Christmas Party and one of the Oval Office. The interplay between the work and the surrounding images explore cultural connections that are both humorous and critical, and Andrews demonstrates how the construction of meanings is always in flux.
Run for President is the latest in the MCA’s acclaimed Ascendant Artist Series, which features exhibitions that present the most relevant new artists working today.
Kathryn Andrews has recently presented solo exhibitions of her work at the Bass Museum of Art, Miami (2014), and Museum Ludwig, Cologne (2013). Recent group exhibitions featuring her work include: Teen Paranormal Romance, The Renaissance Society at The University of Chicago, Atlanta Contemporary Art Center, and the Santa Barbara Museum of Art (2014–15); The Los Angeles Project, Ullens Center for Contemporary Art, Beijing (2014); Made in L.A. 2012, Hammer Museum, Los Angeles (2012); and First Among Equals, Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia (2012). Andrews lives and works in Los Angeles.

