
Wrath Pin Face Binned is part Et al.’s expanded program, presenting two concurrent exhibitions: one organized by Et al. and one organized by a guest gallery. The exhibitions play with incidental contact and surprising context along with Et al.’s longtime interest in hospitality.
Andrea Longacre-White (b. 1980, Radnor, PA) has been the focus of solo exhibitions that include Andrea Longacre-White, Nicelle Beauchene Gallery, (New York), Ceiling, Bellwether (Cleveland), The Existing Term Has Become Inadequate, Various Small Fires, (Los Angeles), Pad Scans, West Street Gallery (New York), and Dark Current, Rental Gallery (New York). She participated in the ICP Triennial, International Centre for Photography (New York) and has contributed to group exhibitions at venues such as Brand New Gallery (Milan), Bischoff Weiss (London), and the New Museum (New York). She has been the recipient of the Rema Hort Mann award and will be included in upcoming shows at The New Museum, a solo off site project with the Cleveland Museum of Art, and is currently in a group exhibition at Capital Gallery SF.
Nate Boyce (b. 1982, Kansas City, MO) Nate Boyce lives and works in San Francisco. Recent solo exhibitions include, Polyscroll I,II,III,IV, Kunstverein München (Munich), and Polyscroll, Yerba Buena Center for Contemporary Art (San Francisco). Recently his work has been shown at Alter Space (San Francisco), Galerie Éric Hussenot, organized by Franklin Melendez &amp; Queer Thoughts (Paris), Abrons Art Center (New York), Institute of Contemporary Arts (London), On Stellar Rays (New York), and he was featured in the California Biennial, 2010. Boyce is also actively involved in the experimental music scene, collaborating and touring with musical acts including Matmos and Oneohtrix Point Never with whom he has performed at venues such as the Museum of Modern Art (New York), San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, Centre Pompidou (Paris), Royal Festival Hall (London), and The Mattress Factory (Pittsburgh), among others. Boyce has a forthcoming solo exhibition at Altman Siegel this July.
Erika Ceruzzi (b. 1990, Kensington, MD) currently has a solo exhibition on view, Laundered Fang, at Springsteen through June 11. She recently co-curated EVA, at Interstate Projects (New York). Previous solo exhibitions include Menswear, Still House (New York) and m, i, n, e, Interstate Projects (New York). Recent two-person exhibitions include Koroneiki (w/ Morgan Canavan) Hester (New York), Material Art Fair (w/ Colin Foster) Springsteen (Mexico City), and Jardin No. 19 (w/ Alex Ito) Springsteen. Her work has been shown at Muscle Beach (Portland), Rowing (London), Rail Curatorial Projects (Miami), Yves Klein Archives (Paris), Division Gallery (Montreal), V1 (Copenhagen), and Howard St (New York).
Brendan Fowler (b. 1978, Berkley, CA) lives and works in Los Angeles. Recent solo exhibitions Portraits, Mathew (New York), New Pictures, Six Sampler Works, and Benches, Richard Telles Fine Art (Los Angeles), and New Pictures, Bench, and Six Sampler Works, Capital (San Francisco). His work has recently been exhibited at MoMA (New York), Hammer Museum (Los Angeles), White Columns (New York), Half Gallery (New York), LAXART (Los Angeles), Hezi Cohen Gallery (Tel Aviv), and V1 Gallery (Copenhagen), among many others. For many years he did music performances and released records under the name BARR, and is also the founder of Election Reform! and Some Ware with Cali DeWitt. Forthcoming, his work will be presented at Liste (Basel).
Flannery Silva (b. 1991, Stone Ridge, NY) lives and works in Los Angeles. Recent solo and two person exhibitions include Fawn’s Leap, NY w/ Jacky Connolly, Kimberly Klark (New York) and Youth Dew, Springsteen (Baltimore). Her work has also been shown at Centre For Style (Melbourne), HQ HQ (Portland), Evening Hours (New York), Open Space (Baltimore), and Sophiajacob (Baltimore). Silva is a member of the band Odwalla88 with Chloe Maratta.
Marisa Takal (b. 1991, Montclair, NJ) lives and works in Los Angeles. Takal has shown in numerous solo, two-person, and group shows including: Alter Space (San Francisco), SADE LA (Los Angeles), Jeffrey Stark (New York), and Interstate Projects curated by Springsteen (Brooklyn). In 2016, she was named the recipient of the Rema Hort Mann Foundation Emerging Artist Award and the Stanley Hollander Award and recently closed a solo exhibition, Heekin Toonutsi, at Night Gallery (Los Angeles).

