
Palais de Tokyo presents an exhibition conceived by Tino Sehgal (born in Britain in 1976, lives in Berlin). The second in a series of “carte blanche” shows begun with Philippe Parreno in 2013, Sehgal presents his works alongside works of other artists he has invited in a sprawling mise-en-scene that unfolds through the entirety of the Palais de Tokyo’s 13,000 m2 (140,000 ft2).
The exhibition, Sehgals most extensive to date, brings together a number of new and existing pieces situated in the labyrinthine architecture of Palais de Tokyo. The works interact with each other in ways the artist began to experiment with at Berlin’s Martin Gropius Bau in 2015 and earlier this year in Marrakech, generating a new level of complexity for Sehgal’s projects.
Tino Sehgal challenges conventional museum exhibition precepts by placing a central focus on social interaction rather than the inanimate object. His artworks are brought into existence through human capacities such as dance, speech and song and are present during the entire opening hours of the institution. Enacted by participants and often involving the visitors, each work has its own specific emotional and aesthetic nature; the different pieces enter into a dance with one another as the exhibition itself transforms.
In response to the invitation to use the building as a whole, the attempt is to integrate works by other artists (Daniel Buren, James Coleman, Félix González-Torres, Pierre Huyghe, Isabel Lewis, Philippe Parreno) as well as formats that operate according to other temporalities, like that of conversations or occasions, into an organically transforming ensemble. Sehgal’s «carte blanche» thereby proposes a model that allows for varying degrees of individualized and collective experience.
The series of discussions is organized in collaboration with the Institut Francais and revolves around a reevaluation of notions of presence, experience and object in today’s culture.
Curator: Rebecca Lamarche-Vadel
Artistic producers: Asad Raza and Julia Simpson
Production Managers: Géraldine Caizergues and ManonLefort-Meekel

