
True to its commitment to showcasing emerging artists beyond institutional walls, in parallel to MANIFESTA 11 Zurich, Palais de Tokyo presents the exhibition Your Memories are our Future. The show is the result of a unique partnership with the art production company ACRUSH AG settled in a former railway maintenance plant, where the exhibition is held from 11th – 24th June, 2016.
The exhibition, by its curator, Julien Fronsacq:
The exhibition transforms an old maintenance plant into a bedroom where day and night, work and dreams trade with each other (Botella). The idle machines become dioramas (Altmann). The exhibition sets out to be a real platform where the public and private spheres come together (Beaufils) ; personal desires share the stage with public representation, marketing and magical poetry (Réol, Madison and Rossetti), astronomy and archaeology (Galiciadis, Rossi). Just as the former railway maintenance plant has now become a place of artistic production, the exhibition goes beyond the fixed categories that usually distinguish industry, craft and art, to offer an indeterminate critical consideration of the artwork. The machines surrounding it are still predominant, preventing a perception of total detachment from the techniques that surround it. Amid the controversy over the question of technique, ‘Your Memories are our Future’, turns to the writer Alain Damasio from whom the exhibition takes its title. Beyond the split between the championing of the machine and reactionary pessimism, the social science fiction author reminds us how even the imagination is unable to overcome a ‘mechanical‘ development during this present.
This project is part of Palais de Tokyo’s continued mission to promote the contemporary French art scene during major international art events, in this case MANIFESTA 11 Zürich, What People Do for Money (11.6.-18.9.2016), as part of MANIFESTA Parallel events. A similar initiative previously took place in Singapore, with an exhibition co-produced with the ICA Singapore and presented on the occasion of Art Stage Singapore, as well as with two participations at the Lyon Biennale (2013 and 2015) and the itinerant exhibition Inside China coproduced with the K11 Foundation during Art Basel Hong Kong 2015 and finally, projects with MoMA PS1 and the Stedelijk Museum in 2014.
Curators: Julien Fronsacq (Curator, Palais de Tokyo) and Scipio Schneider (ACRUSH)

