
YES TO ALL since the 1990s, takes Sylvie Fleury in their works in many ways with respect to commerce and luxury goods world. The Museum Villa Stuck dedicated her summer 2016 a large solo exhibition. Fleury recorded the historic rooms of the Museum Villa Stuck and is there an overview of her work of the past 25 years. They also designed new works for the Villa Stuck. A special highlight is a glass piece, created in collaboration with the Mayerschen Hofkunstanstalt.
Sylvie Fleury is known for its productions of glamor, fashion and luxury products: shopping bags known fashion companies are in showroom as well as staged on the ground broken makeup products. Status symbols and fetishes of the consumer world are moved to the context of the art world and questioned their value. For the purposes of Duchamp are their properties readymades, underline the Warhol approach a critique of the commodity world. The power of the brand, the logo Signum a global consumer world these marketing strategies excessive Fleury in their complex works. Neon signs proclaiming messages of the fashion industry: Envy, to see in Mary von Stucks bedroom, quoted a well-known perfume, combining the transience of a fragrance with its marketing to a paradox. Works of famous (male) artists, about the minimal art-artist Dan Flavin or Daniel Buren concept works, Fleury adds provocatively with a feminist connotation. By interfering with the aesthetic concept of this work, it breaks on their seriousness.
In the exhibition My Life on the Road at the Museum Villa Stuck Sylvie Fleury also relates to the historic state rooms of Franz von Stuck. This is understood in his time like no other, to create a brand: from your own typeface to its designed as a Gesamtkunstwerk Villa he was concerned with recognition and ingenious art product development a challenge for Fleurys work. Her installations are between seduction and superficiality, art and advertising, concept and consumption. They reveal desire and specialist or insider knowledge, as well as social codes.
Sylvie Fleury was born in 1961 in Geneva, where she lives and works. Since 1991 she has participated in numerous exhibitions, including solo exhibitions at the Centre de Arte Contemporaneo, Malaga (2011); the Musée dArt Contemporain de Genéve, Geneva (2008), and at the Kunsthalle Wien (2006). She is a winner of the prestigious prize The Geneva Société des Arts Prize 2015«. In Munich Fleury was last seen in 2010 in the cube of the Lenbachhaus. In 1999 she participated in the group exhibition Wall Works in the Villa Stuck.

