



The oeuvre of Hans Op de Beeck is markedly multidisciplinary. He creates large installations, sculptures, films, videos, photographs, paintings, drawings, texts, theatre and music. Recently he wrote and directed his first play, Nach dem Fest, for Schauspiel Frankfurt, for which he also created the decor, costumes and music.
With Silent Rooms, his now fourth solo exhibition at Galerie Krinzinger, the artist presents new sculptures, set within a decidedly intimate whole.
The title, Silent Rooms, refers to the atmosphere of intimate spaces in which life seems to have silently come to a standstill – quiet, languid, as if in a gentle sleep. Rooms bathed in a gentle, weak, diffuse light, or filled with the silent presence of night.
The artworks present life-size representations of anonymous figures – children and adults – at rest or steeped in thought, still lifes of everyday objects and contemporary vanitas scenes, as well as interpretations of garden elements such as, for instance, a dark lily pond. Rooms are, metaphorically, also the quiet places in our mind, in our memory, the places where we store memories or organize our thoughts.
This dormant whole aims to address, in all its simplicity, the timelessness we experience in those moments when we cease to fulfil a social role, when we withdraw, silently turn in on ourselves, get in touch with our breathing, our thoughts, our core. The life-sized figures all have their eyes closed, turned inward. The still lifes and elements of nature are silent, as if petrified.
In this exhibition, Op de Beeck combines banal and decorative objects, everyday postures and classical poses, nature and culture. In all of these works, aspects of timelessness are combined with contemporary props and details.
The artist here does not seek to uncover any spectacular form or content, but rather deep meaning, and poetry.
Hans Op de Beeck was born in Turnhout in 1969. He lives and works in Brussels, Belgium. Op de Beeck has shown his work extensively in solo and group exhibitions around the world.
He had substantial institutional solo shows at the GEM Museum of Contemporary Art of The Hague, The Hague, NL (2004); MUHKA Museum of Contemporary Art, Antwerp, B (2006); Centraal Museum, Utrecht, NL (2007); the Smithsonian’s Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington DC, US (2010); Kunstmuseum Thun, CH (2010); Centro de Arte Caja de Burgos, Burgos, ES (2010); Butler Gallery, Kilkenny, IRL (2012); Kunstverein Hannover, D (2012); Tampa Museum of Art, Tampa, USA (2013); the Harn Museum of Art, Gainesville, FL, USA (2013); FRAC Paca, Marseille, F (2013); MIT List Visual Arts Center, Cambridge, Boston MA, US (2014); MOCA Cleveland, OH, US (2014); Sammlung Goetz, Munich, D (2014), 
Op de Beeck participated in numerous group shows at institutions such as The Reina Sofia, Madrid, ES; the Scottsdale Museum of Contemporary Art, AZ, US; the Towada Art Center, Towada, JP; ZKM, Karlsruhe, DE; MACRO, Rome, IT; the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, GB; PS1, New York, NY, US; Musée National d’Art Moderne, Centre Pompidou, Paris, FR; Wallraf-Richartz Museum, Köln, DE; Hangar Bicocca, Milano, IT; the Hara Museum of Contemporary Art, Tokyo, JP; 21C Museum, Louisville, Kentucky, US; The Drawing Center, New York, NY, US; Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna, AT; Shanghai Art Museum, Shanghai, CN; MAMBA, Buenos Aires, AR; Haus der Kunst, Munich, DE; Museo d’Arte Moderna di Bologna, Bologna, IT; Kunstmuseum Bonn, Bonn DE, 
His work was invited for the Venice Biennale, Venice, IT; the Shanghai Biennale, Shanghai, CN; the Aichi Triennale, Aichi, JP; the Singapore Biennale, Singapore, SG; Art Summer University, Tate Modern, London, GB; the Kochi-Muziris Biennale, IN, and many other art events.




