
Lulu is pleased to announce a solo exhibition of the German, Berlin-based artist Manfred Pernice.
A sculptor by trade, Pernice’s work exists at the juncture of autonomous sculpture and installation. Its specific constellation of reference includes everything from vernacular or anonymous urban architectural elements, product display design, and the accidental cumulative aesthetics of, say, the garage, as well as an elaborate, on-going discourse regarding the sculpture and its pedestal that goes back to Brancusi.
Although it will feature sculptural elements, this exhibition will focus on the artist’s cassette series. Probably the most pictorial aspect of Pernice’s work, the cassettes presented here consist of metal armatures with glass coverings inside of which the artist places two-dimensional material in what he refers to as “a sorting system.” This sorted material can be everything from images, newspaper clippings, a napkin, texts, in one case, images of his own work, so and so forth. Unfixed inside the cassettes loose leaf, so to speak, the material is subject to the same provisionality and indeterminacy known to characterize the sculpture, and as such, functions as unstable elements of what could almost be considered living collages.
Pernice’s exhibition will inaugurate the expansion of Lulu through the incorporation of a second space. Located on the street directly in front of the building where Lulu now is, the new space represents a modest expansion of 12 square meters, in addition to the 9 square meters of our current venue. As such, Lulu will now be comprised of two exhibition spaces.
The exhibition will be accompanied by a catalog published by Mousse Publishing.
Manfred Pernice was born in 1963 in Hildesheim. He lives and works in Berlin. His works have been shown in numerous international solo and group exhibitions, including the Gemeentemuseum Den Haag (2014), in the Secession in Vienna (2010), in the Neue Nationalgalerie in Berlin (2010), at the Centre Pompidou, Paris (2009), the Venice Biennial (2003), the documenta11 in Kassel (2002) and at Portikus in Frankfurt a.M. (2000). Pernice’s work is included in institutional collections such as the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York, the Ludwig Museum in Cologne, the Stedelijk Museum voor Actuele Kunst in Gent and the Nationalgalerie at Hamburger Bahnhof in Berlin.
Lulu is an independent, Mexico City-based project space founded and run by the artist Martin Soto Climent and the independent curator Chris Sharp.

