
With the beginning of the new year, BQ for the first time presents a solo exhibition by Raphaela Vogel.
For her presentation, the artist guts the gallery space: by removing a wall and by replacing the interior wooden façade behind the windows with a dark tinted window film as well as by relocating office and archive, she exposes the basal architecture.
Upon entering the gallery, the viewer immediately becomes part of a scenography consisting of four video installations, unfolding over a sequence of four rooms, transforming the exhibition spaces in a three-dimensional narration. In the main exhibition space, an installation mimics the room’s footprint via a modular aluminum truss system that also serves as a projection screen and audio equipment support structure. The viewers find themselves thrown into an all-comprising concert setting, surrounded by a powerful and overwhelming sound.
A characteristic feature of Raphaela Vogel’s videos is the interaction between the artist, who always appears as the protagonist, and the camera that she operates and the gaze of which she directs onto herself. Although in this set-up she appears as both subject and object of the camera, the two of them perform as different actors; this is especially true when a remote-controlled drone carries the camera. The complex interaction constantly poses the question who plays the dominating and who the dominated role. In terms of the symbolic image of the female body and its relation to technology that commonly is marked by male connotation, this question also addresses the issue of gender ratio. The latent juxtaposition is further developed with the sculptural objects of the exhibition, such as a shisha with four tubes or a four-persons-urinal, at the same time functioning as fittings of video projectors.
Raphaela Vogel (born 1988 in Nuremberg) lives and works in Amsterdam. After her studies at the Academy of Fine Arts in Nuremberg and at the Städelschule in Frankfurt, she currently is a scholar at De Ateliers in Amsterdam. In Spring of 2015, she held her first solo exhibition at Bonner Kunstverein, Bonn. Future presentations include Dortmunder Kunstverein, Dortmund, Nam June Paik Art Center, Seoul, next March, and riesa efau, Dresden, in August, where another solo show has been granted to her in connection with the Columbus Award of Contemporary Art.

