
The central Nave of the CAPC musée, an emblematic space in the history of contemporary art.
The central Nave of the CAPC musée dart contemporain de Bordeaux is the emblematic space of its patrimonial building. It has been the hosting place of memorable exhibitions which have accompanied the history of contemporary art.
María Inés Rodríguez, director of the CAPC musée and curator of this exhibition, has commissioned Leonor Antunes a series of sculptural installations to be displayed in the Nave of the museum with the aim of shedding a new light on this magnificent space. As Antunes says, she wishes to “shift the space of the museum, from one impressive dimension to a more human scale, allowing the visitors to embody themselves in her installation thanks to a closer relation with the works.”
&nbsp;
Antunes understands her work as the hybridization of vernacular techniques and the cultural legacy of modernism.
Leonor Antuness work often refers to the legacy of modernism and its specific geometrical patterns, as well as forms and structures developed by architects and designers of early 20th century.
Mathematics, measures, scales and the beauty of certain proportions fuel her practice. Her works enter a dialogue with the spaces they occupy, be it through the way they echo the architecture surrounding them, or by her use of the proportions as tools to develop each new installation. Antunes is particularly mindful of the elegance of handcraft, starting with that of her native country, Portugal, and her preferred materials include cork, leather, brass and cordage.
For this exhibition, borrowing its title from Anni Alberss 1957 essay The Pliable Plane, the artist will occupy the 1.500 square meters of the floor of the Nave with a covering of cork and brass, and suspend across the whole width of this monumental space a hanging sculpture made of this same alloy which will hang down to the floor from a more than 20-meter height, both these works being inspired by Anni Alberss fabric designs. Other pieces displayed will evoke the architectural work of Lina Bo Bardi.
&nbsp;
Leonor Antunes (Lisbon, 1972)
Her most recent solo exhibitions were presented at Pérez Art Museum Miami (2014), Kunsthalle Basel (2013), Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (2013), and Kunstverein Harburger Bahnhof, Hamburg (2012). Her work has also been included in a number of international group exhibitions, including the 12th Sharjah Biennial, UAE (2015), and the 8th Berlin Biennial (2014), and has recently been exhibited in venues such as the Bronx Museum of the Arts, New York (2014), Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna (2014), CNEAI, Chatou, France (2013), and MIT List Visual Arts Center, Cambridge (2012). Antunes will be the subject of solo exhibitions at CAPC musée d’art contemporain de Bordeaux (2015), Tensta konsthall, Stockholm (2016), San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (2016), and Museo Tamayo, Mexico City (2017).

