
1301PE is pleased to present an exhibition of Diana Thater’s new work Colorvision, 2016.
The worldwide debut of Diana Thater’s new work at 1301PE follows the artist’s comprehensive mid-career survey at LACMA (2015-16), which travels to the MCA Chicago in October 2016. This is Thater’s ninth solo exhibition at the gallery. The series Colorvision consists of 8 individual monitor pieces. Each vertically-hung monitor displays the name of a color along with a bouquet of flowers in a different, complimentary, color. The colors used are those of the video spectrum: red, green, blue (primaries); cyan, magenta, yellow (secondaries); purple and orange (tertiary). The word “RED”, for examples, appears with cyan flowers, while the word “CYAN” appears with red flowers. The series is based on a neurological test that is given to people to decipher the relationship between sensation and language:
“It’s especially difficult for a viewer to think about color and language simultaneously and the dichotomy, when shown one color but asked to read the name of it’s opposite, forces a rupture between the two. The question is: Does reason or sensation dominate our experience of art?” – Diana Thater
Diana Thater (b. 1962, San Francisco, USA) has created pioneering film, video, and installation-based works since the early 1990s. The artist lives and works in Los Angeles. Her work has recently been the subject of solo exhibitions at prominent institutions that include the Aspen Art Museum, Colorado; San Jose Museum of Art, California (both 2015); Institute of Modern Art, Brisbane (2011); Santa Monica Museum of Art, California (2010); Kunsthaus Graz, Austria; Natural History Museum, London (both 2009). Thater’s work is held in such public collection as the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Tate, London; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. Thater’s mid-career survey The Sympathetic Imagination travels from the Los Angeles County Museum of Art to the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago this Fall (October 29, 2016 January 8, 2017).

