
Night Gallery is proud to present Aunt Nancy, an exhibition of work by Alexandra Noel, Andy Robert, Anna Rosen, Chloe Seibert, Nelson Sullivan, and Sam Lipp. Aunt Nancy is titled after the aunt of Nelson Sullivan, whose prolific video practice documented his life and friends in downtown New York in the 1980s, as well as visits to his hometown of Kershaw, South Carolina, where Nancy lived.
Aunt Nancy appears in many of Sullivans videos, presented as a simultaneously sympathetic, strong, and vulnerable figure. The works included in the exhibition were created from personal memories, found photographs, knick knacks, and the art of storytelling. Nelson Sullivans portrayal of Aunt Nancy embodies a number of interpersonal dynamics underlying the works in the show: parent to child, adult self to childhood memory, and self to home—that is, the hometown you find yourself in versus the home that you make for yourself as an adult.
&nbsp;
Sam Lipp was born in 1989, and lives and works in New York. Recent exhibitions include X Bienal de Nicaragua, Managua; Balice Hertling, Paris; Ellis King, Dublin; Éric Hussenot, Paris; Central Fine, Miami; Neochrome, Turin; Bodega, New York; and Arcadia Missa, London. Lipp is also the co-director of Queer Thoughts, a gallery in NYC.
Anna Rosen was born in 1984 in Arlington, VA, and received her BFA from RISD in 2006 and her MFA from Columbia University in 2010. Rosen has been included in exhibitions at Silberkuppe, Berlin; and at Murray Guy, American Medium, and Derek Eller Gallery, New York. In 2016, she will have a solo exhibition at Kerry Schuss, New York, and will also be included in exhibitions at Lyles &amp; King, New York, and at Night Gallery, Los Angeles. She had a two-person exhibition with the artist John Miller at Malrauxs Place, Brooklyn, in 2014, and a solo exhibition at Night Gallery in 2013. Rosen is based in New York.
Chloe Seibert was born in New York in 1989, and lives and works in Chicago. Recent exhibitions include Balice Hertling, Paris; Efrain Lopez, Chicago; American Medium, Brooklyn; COOPER COLE, Toronto; and Atlanta Contemporary. Upcoming exhibitions include Queer Thoughts, New York; and Courtney Blades, Chicago.
Nelson Sullivan was born in 1948 in Kershaw, SC, and lived in New York during the 1980s, where he documented the now legendary Downtown scene in a prolific and seminal body of videos. His work has been featured in numerous film festivals in the United States and Europe, and has also been shown in museum and gallery exhibitions, most recently Greater New York at MoMA P.S.1 in 2015-16. Sullivan died in New York on July 4, 1989.
Alexandra Noel was born in 1989, and lives and works in Los Angeles. Recent exhibitions include Bodega, New York; Neochrome, Turin; Hester, New York; and Shanaynay, Paris. Her first book By Rote was published by Holoholo Books in 2015.
Andy Robert was born in 1984 in Les Cayes, Haiti, and received his MFA from California Institute of the Arts in 2011. He attended the Whitney Independent Study Program in 2014-2015, and in summer of 2016 will attend Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture. Robert has exhibited at the Bienal de las Fronteras (Instituto Tamaulipeco para la Cultura y las Artes) in Tamaulipas, Mexico, Papillion Art in Los Angeles, Dimensions Variable in Miami, and the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York. Robert is a recipient of the Rema Hort Mann Foundation Grant, and he is based in Los Angeles.

