
New York-based artist Amy Sillman is an internationally reknowned painter. In her works, gesture, color, and drawing-based procedures are imbued with questions of feminism, performativity, interiority, and humor. Since the early 1990s, she has sought to corrupt and complicate the relations between figuration and abstraction. She speaks of them as “two things that are friends and antagonists”; thus her intensely layered canvases never resolve in either/or. Shapes of color may be interrupted by forms – a hand, a foot, or a figure – which in the next moment fall back into abstraction. Her paintings are determined by an ambiguous state of productive and humorous struggle. Painting is shown as an act of constructing, deconstructing, and reconstructing meanings or forms, as an arena of tensions wherein different pictorial models and figures interact. Within the last few years, Sillman has expanded her investigations from the canvas to the screens of smartphones and tablets, to the inclusion of drawings and the production of zines, while continuously delving into the current situation of abstraction, color, and the diagram.
With Yes &amp; No, a special installation conceived for the particular space of the KUB Arena, Sillman proceeds to explore these paths. By proposing to show everything except paintings on canvas, Sillman is challenging the expectations of a painting show. Yes &amp; No, her first institutional solo show in the German speaking context, reveals the underpinnings of her modes of working, and openly deals with everything which usually is not at the foreground: the thoughts behind the process of making a painting, on letting an image appear, the relation of fiction and the real, abstraction and figuration. It is a show about beginning and ending, painting and drawing, and the interplay of seeing, saying, and marking.
Sillman earned her BFA from the School of Visual Arts in New York and her MFA from Bard College in 1995. She has received numerous awards and grants, her work has been widely exhibited and is included in numerous public collections, including The Museum of Modern Art in New York, The Art Institute of Chicago, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and the Whitney Museum of American Art. The first large-scale survey of her work, entitled one lump or two, was curated by Helen Molesworth. Starting at the ICA Boston in 2013, the exhibit traveled to the Aspen Art Museum, and then to the Hessel Museum of Art at Bard College. In December 2014 Amy Sillman participated in the group show The Forever Now at MoMA, New York, organized by Laura Hoptman.

