
Reena Spaulings is pleased to present How to DISappear in America, a new musical by Ei Arakawa. A live performance based on a book by Seth Price (itself based on texts found on the Internet), Arakawa, together with the writer Dan Poston, somehow extracts a drama about spousal abuse and life on the run from a collection of writings in the how-to vein, setting these to music composed by Stefan Tcherepnin. Performing within an installation of flat screen teleprompters and handmade LED screens resembling flags, cast members lip synch to a pre-recorded soundtrack. At center stage is Set, a talking animated envelope (a form which also recurs in the work of Seth Price) who helps narrate the drama while offering advice and instruction to characters attempting to shed their identities and go underground. Stage props such as rolling luggage and Amazon delivery boxes evoke a world of non-stop mobilization. Arakawa’s cartoonish, all-seeing, Kafka-esque, sing song Amerika is a non-place that takes the form of a site-specific work, mobilizing local art world colleagues and the gallery itself. On Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, a shorter performance, Nightmare of Gallerists: SP Press Release 2004-2013, will repeat during gallery hours.
Arakawa has previously presented musicals based on MoMA curator Barbara London’s 1980s research into multi-media art in Japan (Paris and Wizard, MoMA, 2013) and on the history of the Gutai movement (Jiro, Digital Painting, The Dallas Museum of Art, 2015). Following this debut at RSFA, How to DISappear in America will travel to the Berlin Biennale in June.
PROGRAM
How to DISappear in America: The Musical
April 3, 4pm
April 10, 4pm
April 17 at 2:30pm &amp; 4pm
CAST: Ben Morgan-Cleveland, Miho Hatori, Jake Hart, Alaina Claire Feldman,
Robert Bittenbender, Ei Arakawa, Caroleena Bingham, Stefan Tcherepnin, and Janice Guy
Nightmare of Gallerists: SP Press Release 2004 2013
April 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16 at 2pm, 3pm, 4pm, 5pm
CAST: Emily Sundblad, Monika Senz, Christopher Schwartz, Marie Karlberg, Ei Arakawa
Closing Reception: Sunday April 17, 5:00pm 7pm
Music: Stefan Tcherepnin
Lyrics: Ei Arakawa &amp; Dan Poston
Programming &amp; Technical Assistance: Andrew Steinmetz
Stage Manager: Marie Karlberg
Installation Assistance: Hanna Törnudd &amp; Gela Patashuri
&nbsp;
Ei Arakawa’s previous exhibitions include: Gwangju Biennial, Korea (2014); Whitney Biennial, New York (2014); Carnegie International, Pittsburgh (2013); Pavilion of Georgia at the 55th International Art Exhibition, la Biennale di Venezia, Venice (2013); Tate Modern, London (2012); 30th São Paulo Biennial, São Paulo (2012); The Museum of Modern Art, New York (2012). He is performing at Serpentine Gallery, London at the end of month.

