
“WE ARE THE SOCIAL SCULPTURE!
THIS IS THE THIRD SCULPTURE !
YOU ARE THE THINKING SCULPTURE!“
“I wish to open up our understanding of life. You are ly friend, ly enemy, my sculpture. We are here to explain the notion of Sociale Sculpture, an idea given to us by Joseph Beuys during the Sixties, an idea very much related to German Nationalism and consciousness during the post-war years. As I am American my distorsions of his genius shall take expand Social Sculpture to include the personal, to include the intimate sides of our life, the embarrassing moments whitout the transcendental meaning of a shaman, and show how everyman and everywoman is an artist now, without the prerequisite of a transformed society, of the Green Party or the Party for Direct Referendum… “(3)
Air de Paris is very pleased to present the complete archive of “I am for you” initiated in New York in 1990, then activated the same year at Cologne. It will be reactivated by distribution of (4) texts in the streets of Paris during the afternoon of the first day of the exhibition until gallerys opening.
In Ben Kinmont’s oeuvre, relative terminology of archive can be conjugated in present. Through, “I am for you”, the artist is testing today and again his idea of third sculpture, thinking sculpture and thus invite us to reconsider what means: “We are a multitude”!
Ben Kinmont has two solo exhibitions at Rennes currently. “We are a multitude” is on view until April 22nd at Galerie Art et Essai as well as “Open by Chance &amp; Appointment” at Cabinet du Livre d’Artiste. On the occasion of the opening, Air de Paris is also pleased to announce the lauching of two recent books «Open by Chance &amp; Appointment» and «The Antinomian Press» Bibliography of his publishing company at the gallery and a talk with Ben Kinmont that will happen on April 17th at 5 pm at Section 7 Books.(4)
&nbsp;
(3) Extract from one of the 4 catalytic texts written by Ben Kinmont given during activation of “I am for you”.
(4) Section 7 Books, 31 passage du Ponceau Paris 2ème.

