
VI, VII is pleased to announce Superficial Abyss, a solo exhibition by American artist Amy Yao.

For her first solo exhibition at the gallery Yao presents ‘Glass Slipper 1-5’ a series of silver gelatin photographs printed from a vintage collection of glass plates. Each photograph represents a prototype of a surface acoustic wave (SAW) device designed for US military technology in the 1970s &amp; 1980s.
SAW technology has been continuously developed since the late 19th century and is used in everything from radios and television satellites, to mobile phones and touch screens, data scrambling and drone technology.
The photographs therefore describe visual aspects of the technology behind the many communications devices in use today, several of which have their origins in military research.
These works are joined by ‘Temps de Parole’ a new video, in which prank calls are heard over footage of the interior of a Lithium Tantalate wafer factory in Shanghai.
Ever interested in examining consumerism, and identity, through the manufacturing process, Yaos new works deal with fetishization in relation to art and technology, and ‘production’ as material and as a source for experimentation.
_______
Amy Yao (b. 1977, Los Angeles) lives and works in Los Angeles and New York.
Selected solo exhibitions include: Bay Of Smokes, Various Small Fires, Los Angeles; Boom Time Ecosystems, Mathew Gallery, Berlin; Two Weeks, (with Carissa Rodriguez), Indipendenza Studio, Rome; Any Body In The Attic, Important Projects, Oakland ; I dont care about anything else, Paradise Garage, Venice, CA; Skeletons on a Bender, 47 Canal, New York; Kawaii at Green Tea Gallery, Pahoa, Hawaii; Mistress, oooof! Les Bourses, Green Gallery, Milwaukee and The Real Housewives, New Jerseyy, Basel.
Recent group exhibitions include The November Issue, Mathew, Berlin; Looking Back: The Eighth White Columns Annual, selected by Pati Hertling, White Columns, New York; Home and Gardens, Freedman Fitzpatrick, Los Angeles; Emergency Cheesecake, Whitney Museum of Art, New York; Looking Back: The Sixth White Columns Annual, selected by Ken Okiishi and Nick Mauss, White Columns, New York and Greater New York, P.S.1/ MoMA, New York.

