
Bonner Kunstverein is pleased to announce two new solo exhibitions by Phung-Tien Phan and Studio for Propositional Cinema, recipients of the 2015 Peter Mertes Stipendium.
Phung-Tien Phan will present a series of 8 sculptures based upon traditional gravesites in Vietnam. Clad with ceramic tiles, Phan’s tiered structures not only reference ancient Vietnamese tombs but also reflect modern Western architecture and urban planning. They will be accompanied by a new film that employs references to popular culture to humorously pose questions about issues including creativity, privilege, and consumption.
Studio for Propositional Cinema will exhibit the off-set printing plates for ‘Scenes at an Inauguration’, a new play based upon the Studio’s 2013 inaugural performance at Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen, Düsseldorf in 2013. Written in collaboration with the artist Keren Cytter, the text is a layered fiction derived from scripted and improvised dialogue spoken by both official and unofficial participants at the event.
The exhibitions are generously supported by the Peter Mertes Wine Company with additional support from the Embassy of Canada, Berlin (Botschaft von Kanada) and Zimmermann, Cologne. They are accompanied by a new publication produced in collaboration with Strzelecki Books, Cologne.
Established in 1985, the Peter Mertes Stipendium is one of the most renowned opportunities for young artists in North Rhine-Westphalia region. Previous recipients include Carsten Höller (1995), Gregor Schneider (1996), Monika Baer (1998), Matti Braun (1999), Thea Djordjadze, Friedrich Kunath (both 2001), Gert and Uwe Tobias (2004) and Gerda Scheepers (2005). The current recipients, Israel Aten (b. 1986, Detroit) and Katharina Monka (b. 1986, Wunstorf) will have exhibitions at the Kunstverein in July 2017.
Phung-Tien Phan and Studio for Propositional Cinema were selected by a Jury comprising Prof. Anne-Marie Bonnet (University of Bonn and Vice Chair of the Board of Trustees, Bonner Kunstverein), Alexandra Bircken (artist), Michelle Cotton (Director, Bonner Kunstverein) and Ben Kaufmann (Director, Neuer Aachener Kunstverein), from a shortlist of 34 nominations. The two artists each received a total of €6,000 over the course of one year.
Phung-Tien Phan (b. 1983, Essen) studied at Folkwang University of the Arts, Essen and Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. Her work has been exhibited at Cité Internationale des Arts, Paris, Kunsthalle Düsseldorf and Museum Folkwang, Essen. She lives and works in Essen where since 2014, as a member of the artist group New Bretagne, she has run Belle Air’s exhibition programme.

