
The exhibition is dominated by a new series of large scale ‘paintings’ comprised of wallmounted grids of glazed ceramic tiles. Humphreys uses these industrially produced components as a support to which he applies decals. The tiles are then re-fired in a kiln to fix these decals permanently within the glaze. They variously include flat, Patone colours or collaged photographic material of both exotic and everyday subjects. The works utilize a 21st century, digital revision of the process of decalcomania invented by the French engraver Simon François Ravenet (an assistant of the artist William Hogarth) in the late 18th century which was widely adopted in the international ceramics industry in the 1870s.
Although trained as a sculptor Humphreys is best known for his paintings that are variously both representational and abstract and engage a variety of different media. This exhibition will however also feature new sculptural works made in clay. Humphreys (b. 1972 in Essex) lives and works in London. He studied at Winchester School of Art and Design and Chelsea College of Art in the 1990s. This exhibition is Humphrey’s second exhibition with the gallery following ‘Casa Particular’ in London (2014). Other recent solo exhibitions of his work include Under the Wing, Forde, Geneva (2017), ‘Fingers, Christian Andersen, Copenhagen (2016), Bird Food, What Pipeline, Detroit (2015), Natural History’ Christian Andersen, Copenhagen and ‘Tours’, High Art, Paris (2014), ‘Holes’ (with Lucie Stahl), What Pipeline, Detroit (2013), ‘Straight Man’s Camp’, Christian Andersen, Copenhagen (2012) and ‘Data Transfer’ and Background Pictures at Pro Choice, Vienna (respectively in 2011 and 2009). His work has been included in numerous group exhibitions including the 31st Biennial of Graphic Arts, Ljubljana (2015).
Humphreys initiated and ran the gallery Flaca in London from 2003 2007. A revised history of this important space, ‘Flaca/ Tom Humphreys’ was presented at Portikus, Frankfurt am Main in 2011 and included work by Will Benedict, Michael Beutler, Karla Black, Henning Bohl, Jana Euler, Ellen Gronemeyer, Claire Hooper, Tom Humphreys, Paul Lee, Laure Prouvost, Nora Schultz, Lucie Stahl, Sue Tompkins and Alexander Wolff.

