
The exhibition plays around the content and the meaning of how the space has been used during the past years, as garconnieres for secret rendez-vous.
The objects found in the space and a conversation between a man and her lover, eavesdropped through the walls and brought back to memory after several years, are the starting point of the artist who works with the theme of the double reality – other life – meeting someone in an other place out of the daily life which at the same time it’s reality and a part of the life.
There is always a double moment which is mirrored. Its about the inside and the outside and the sense of past times. You can still sense the bodies who loved each other and have spent time together, the feelings which have been all over the space.
Other Life presents a body of work consisting of lights, objects, and drawings, and installed in three different rooms. Each rooms has those three elements repeated.
Studioli is a project founded in Rome by Alessandro Cicoria and Valerie Giampietro in an old quad of ivy-cloaked garçonniere by the Tiber river. Studioli is a space-sharing project where artists are invited to work and reinterpret the space, among smoked mirrors surfaces, chromatic moquettes, boiseries and Magistretti furniture.
Gina Folly (b. 1983) lives and works in Basel. Selected solo exhibitions: I want you to live in my city, 2017, Ermes Ermes, Vienna, AT; Domestic Problems, 2016, Almanac, London, UK; Soon is now, 2016, SPREEZ, Munich, DE; New Conditions, 2015, Ermes-Ermes, Rome, IT; Ströme, 2015, with Mandla Reuter, SALTS, Birsfelden, CH
Selected group shows: Law of the Instrument, 2017, CACBM, Paris, FR; Tilting at Windmills, 2017, Roberta, Frankfurt am Main, DE; Wasser, 2017, Fitzpatrick-Leland House, Los Angeles, USA; Adrift on Plastic Island, 2016, Galerie Bernhard, Zurich, CH; L’etat parfait, 2016, Freymond-Guth Fine Arts, Basel, CH; A MYSTICAL STAIRCASE, 2016, curated by Francesco Urbano Ragazzi for 63rd77thspeps.com; Some of My Best Friends Are Germs, 2016, Le Doc, Paris, FR
Since 2013 Gina Folly runs the artist space ‘Taylor Macklin’ in Zurich together with Selina Grüter and Michèle Graf.

