
ltd los angeles is pleased to screen three feature length films directed by Johan Grimonprez.
Shadow World, 2016, is based upon the critically acclaimed 2011 book by Andrew Feinstein, “The Shadow World: Inside the Global Arms Trade.” Grimonprez’ montage of archival footage and interviews, investigates the shadow world of the global arms trade, where corruption, lies, and greed, drive covert relationships between politicians, industry executives, military intelligence officials, and arms dealers. This documentary reveals the shocking realities of the global arms trade, which is the only business that counts its profits in billions and its losses in human lives. Shadow World won Best Documentary Feature Film at the Edinburgh International Film Festival, Edinburgh, Scotland and at the 61st International Film Festival of Valladolid, Spain.
DOUBLE TAKE, 2009, inspired by Jorge Louis Borges’ writing, explores the commonalities between Cold War paranoia and the entertainment industry, via the master of suspense, Alfred Hitchcock. Exposing the global commoditization of fear, Grimonprez blends archival footage of early 60’s Folgers coffee ads, hysterical Red Menace newsreels, and Alfred Hitchcock’s TV intros, with an imaginary murder plot involving Hitchcock and his doppelganger, to paint a vivid portrait of American media run amuck during the Cold War. DOUBLE TAKE received the Black Pearl Award at the Abu Dhabi film festival, a Spirit Award, and was an official selection of both the Berlin and Sundance Film Festivals.
dial H-I-S-T-O-R-Y premiered at Centre Pompidou in Paris and Documenta X in 1997, eerily foreshadowing the events of September 11th. This internationally acclaimed film essay unveils how airplane hijackings since the 1970s have changed the course of news reporting. The film collages recycled images taken from news broadcasts, Hollywood movies, animated films and commercials. As a child of the first TV generation, His original mix of reality and fiction presents history as a multi- perspective dimension open to manipulation.
Johan Grimonprez (Belgium, 1962) studied at the School of Visual Arts and attended the Whitney Museum Independent Study Program in New York. His work is included in international collections such as the Centre Georges Pompidou (FR); the Kanazawa Art Museum (JP); the National Gallery, (DE); and the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art (DN). His curatorial projects have been hosted at major museums worldwide such as the Whitney Museum in New York; The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in California; The Pinakothek der Moderne in Munich; and the Tate Modern in London. His films have been included in prestigious film festivals including New York, Edinburgh, Telluride, Los Angeles, Rio de Janeiro, Tokyo and Berlin. He lives in Belgium and New York and is a faculty member at the School of Visual Arts (NY).

