
Organized by Lisa Lapinski, the exhibition brings together the work of three artists: Anna Helm, Lisa Lapinski, and Hirsh Perlman. All currently or formerly based in Los Angeles, they share a pedagogical connection as well. Lapinski studied with Perlman at Art Center College of Design in Pasadena. Helm was a student of Lapinski’s at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.
In the center of the gallery Perlman’s wooden gures, Humanitas Equanimitas, suggest a ritualistic gathering of couples, while his series of Obliterati drawings result from his re ection of the metaphorical obliteration of the mind/body dichotomy. Lapinski’s Little My #3 (Shaker board) wraps around the room just above the viewer’s head, interrupted on one wall with a hanging children’s Little My chair — the face of which has been replaced by one of the decorative ovals of the Shaker board. The oversized Holly Hobby Lobby Bow #1 sits below Perlman’s gures with a rigidity reminiscent of an uptight piece of furniture. Across the room, Helm’s Unhushuwule Picnic Table reveals a cryptic phonetic misspelling as well as wooden legs hiding underneath the intricately painted gingham cloth covering. On the wall adjacent to the table, bird droppings and scraps in Helm’s photographs mask details of the daily news.
Lapinski will be presenting a lecture on “Little My Chair” and some thoughts on the signi cance of her red bun at Midway in October. This exhibition will travel to Rice University’s Moody Center for the Arts in 2018.
—
Anna Helm lives and works in Los Angeles. She graduated from the University of Southern California and has shown her work at the Vanity Gallery East, Los Angeles; Between Arrival &amp; Departure, Düsseldorf; Matchbox Gallery/Emergency Room, Houston; and Contact Photo Lab, Los Angeles.
Lisa Lapinski lives and works in Houston where she is an assistant professor at Rice University. Lapinski’s work has been exhibited widely in the United States and Europe. She has had solo exhibitions in the Focus series the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Johann König, Berlin; Taka Ishii, Tokyo; Richard Telles Fine Art, Los Angeles; Studio Guenzani, Milan; and Midway Contemporary Art. She was included in the 2006 Whitney Biennial. She is represented by Kristina Kite Gallery, Los Angeles.
Hirsh Perlman lives and works in Los Angeles and is a professor at UCLA. Perlman’s work has been exhibited throughout the United States and Europe including solo exhibitions at the Renaissance Society, Chicago; a Projects exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York; and Kunstraum, Vienna. His work was included in the 1989 and 2002 Whitney Biennials as well the 1993 Venice Biennale and is represented in the collections of the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Seattle Art Museum; and the Art, Design &amp; Architecture Museum, Santa Barbara.

