
From 25 February to 3 September 2017, the Deichtorhallen in cooperation with the Hanne Darboven Foundation will present the exhibition PACKED TIME at the Falckenberg Collection, which will offer a new perspective on the work of the artist Hanne Darboven (1941–2009). This will be the third time that the Deichtorhallen has devoted an exhibition to the artist. Previous shows included Hanne Darboven: Die geflügelte Erde (1991), Hanne Darboven: Hommage à Picasso (2000). The exhibition PACKED TIME will be curated by Dirk Luckow (General director of Deichtorhallen Hamburg), Goesta Diercks (Exhibition manager of the Falckenberg Collection/Deichtorhallen Hamburg), Florentine Galwas and Nicole Krapat (Scientific directors of the Hanne Darboven Foundation).
Hanne Darboven is among the most internationally significant female artists. She established herself in the male-dominated international Conceptual Art scene. Darboven is mainly known for her writings on time and space and the resulting series of drawings filled with rows of numbers, writing, and later also pictures, often augmented with three-dimensional objects. Darboven’s large-scale installations function like compensating stores of time which bring thousands upon thousands of centuries into a tangible form. This makes her work the quintessence of »packed time.«
The exemplary large-scale work Kinder dieser Welt, which will extend across an entire floor of the building, will be a major focus of the exhibition. With numerous documentary materials such as early design drawings, architectural models, letters, and research materials, for the first time it will be possible to fully understand the history of the creation of the work Welttheater from the Falckenberg Collection—from its source of inspiration to its completion in various media and levels of representation.
Another focus of the exhibition is the dialogue between selected works by Hanne Darboven and works by her artist friends, including Carl Andre, Sol LeWitt, and Lawrence Weiner, as well as additional works from the Falckenberg Collection by artists such as Vito Acconci, John Baldessari, Fiona Banner, John Cage, Sophie Calle, Öyvind Fahlström, Richard Hamilton, Mike Kelley, Imi Knoebel and Ed Ruscha.
Moreover, with artist’s books, journals, and films, the exhibition offers extraordinary insights into the development of Darboven’s work and her connection to her artistic milieu, especially the Conceptual Art scene during her time in New York, and also underscores her considerable international influence.
Along with the exhibition at the Falckenberg Collection, the Hanne Darboven Foundation will open the documentary center Am Burgberg. One of the responsibilities of the foundation is to research Hanne Darboven’s estate where the artist lived and worked, Am Burgberg in Rönneburg (Hamburg-Harburg), and to make it accessible to the public. For the first time ever, documentary materials that augment the exhibition will be shown.

