
Kavi Gupta is pleased to announce our representation of the Roger Brown \ Estate, of the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. In partnering with the Estate, we see infinite possibilities for expanding the global visibility and recognition of Brown’s probing and nuanced practice. Brown’s work is of startling contemporary relevance, cleverly approaching many topics from the natural and built environment, disaster, religion, the art world, popular culture, art history, eroticism, and socio-political concerns from modern warfare to mortality during the HIV/AIDS crisis. Rich in content and innovative in methods of depiction, Brown presaged the subjective and surreal figuration seen in many threads of recent painting.
After an interval for research and evaluation of curatorial possibilities, we look forward to presenting Brown’s work in provocative and unanticipated ways. This new contextualization of Roger Brown will begin with an exhibition at Kavi Gupta this September.
Roger Brown, (1941–1997) born in Hamilton, Alabama and a longtime resident of Chicago, is renowned for using a pop aesthetic to investigate a range of socio-political issues. His trademark silhouettes and curvilinear landscapes depict both the topical and uncomfortable. The Roger Brown Study Collection, maintained by the School of the Art Institute of Chicago with curator Lisa Stone, makes Brown’s prolific art collection and archive available to the public. Brown’s political paintings were recently featured at DC Moore Gallery, New York and his Virtual Still Life works were highlighted in a solo exhibition at Maccarone, New York.
Brown received his BFA and his MFA at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. The artist’s work is included in notable private and public collections including The Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Museum of Modern Art, The Whitney Museum of American Art, The Art Institute of Chic ago, Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, Los Angeles County Museum, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, National Gallery of Art, and The National Portrait Gallery.

