
STANDARD (OSLO) is proud to present an exhibition of new works by Nina Beier entitled “Man”.

“Look down upon my shame,
The cruel wrong that racks my frame,
The grinding anguish that shall waste my strength,
Till times ten thousand years have measured out their length!
He hath devised these chains,
The new throned potentate who reigns,
Chief of the chieftains of the Blest. Ah me!
The woe which is and that which yet shall be
I wail; and question make of these wide skies
When shall the star of my deliverance rise.
And yet-and yet-exactly I foresee
All that shall come to pass; no sharp surprise
Of pain shall overtake me; whats determined
Bear, as I can, I must, knowing the might
Of strong Necessity is unconquerable.
But touching my fate silence and speech alike
Are unsupportable. For boons bestowed
On mortal men I am straitened in these bonds.
I sought the fount of fire in hollow reed
Hid privily, a measureless resource
For man, and mighty teacher of all arts.
This is the crime that I must expiate
Hung here in chains, nailed neath the open sky. Ha! Ha!”
 Aeschylus: “Prometheus Bound”, ca. 430 B.C.E
&nbsp;
Nina Beier (b. 1975, Aarhus, Denmark) lives and works in Berlin. This is her fourth exhibition with the gallery. Recent solo exhibitions include “Cash for Gold” at Kunstverein Hamburg, Germany; “Nina Beier” at Contemporary Art Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania; “Rocky” at Kunsthaus Glarus, Switzerland; “Razor Chain Mineral” at Nottingham Contemporary, UK; “Sweat no Sweat” at Mostyn, Llandudno, UK; “Nina Beier” at Kunsthal Charlottenborg, Copenhagen; and “What Follows Will Follow II” at Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco. Her work has been included in group shows at Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Nouveau Musée National de Monaco, Monaco; Centre Pompidou, Paris; Tate Modern, London; CCA Wattis, San Francisco; Musée dArt Moderne, Paris; KW Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; The Artists Institute, New York; Fondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo, Turin; Swiss Institute, New York; and the Power Station, Shanghai. Her works will be included in the upcoming exhibition “Action!” at Kunsthaus Zürich later next month.

