
After days of deliberation with the staff at Petzel Gallery, we decided to go forward with something different for the month of January 2017.
We need to talk… will try to address the myriad issues presented by the election results of November 8th.
The exhibition is divided into two parts:
1. Participation in writing, through film and in live discussions.
As visitors enter the gallery they will be invited to write down their reactions, thoughts, anxieties, hopes for the future.
The gallery will devote one room to screening film clippings, shorts, vignettes that in some way tackle today’s issues. This part of the program is open to anyone who wants his or her concerns brought before an audience. Submissions* will be added to a loop and screened in the gallery as well as on the website.
Saturday Symposiums: on three Saturdays during the show, interested parties and the public will be invited to participate in symposium-style conversations, debates, and readings on different issues: CIVIL LIBERTIES, a conversation with Justin Caguiat of the MANILA INSTITUTE and Eduardo Restrepo of SWEETYS (January 21st), IMMIGRATION (January 28th), and THE ENVIRONMENT (February 4th).
2. Artists Respond: A list of artists whose work will be on view in the main space is in formation, but at time of press, includes Yael Bartana, Judith Bernstein, Andrea Bowers, Troy Brauntuch, AA Bronson, Cecily Brown, Paul Chan, Mark Dion, Sam Durant, Charles Gaines, Rainer Ganahl, Hans Haacke, Rachel Harrison, Dana Hoey, Jenny Holzer, Jonathan Horowitz, Josh Kline, Barbara Kruger, Sean Landers, Louise Lawler, Glenn Ligon, Robert Longo, Allan McCollum, Adam McEwen, Sarah Morris, Joyce Pensato, Stephen Prina, Raha Raissnia, Peter Saul, Dana Schutz, Amy Sillman, Gary Simmons, Dirk Skreber, Slavs and Tatars, Henry Taylor, Andrew Tider/Jeff Greenspan, Rirkrit Tiravanija, Meg Webster.
A percentage of sales will be donated to any organization that seems appropriate to artist and collector.
*Beginning January 1st, 2017: please send submitted video files titled “January2017” as downloadable links via WeTransfer, Dropbox, or Vimeo to video@petzel.com. If uploading via Vimeo, please ensure the video is downloadable and can be added to collections. Work should be up to 5 minutes in duration, with a max file size of 2GB, one submission per sender. Submissions will close January 31st. We reserve the right to omit videos with offensive content.

