
Galerie Thomas Zander is delighted to present exhibitions of works by Judith Joy Ross and Robert Adams, two of the most renowned and influential contemporary artists in American photography.
Robert Adams (born 1937 in Orange, New Jersey, lives and works in Astoria, Oregon) has adapted his vision in order to continue to find ecstatic moments in the ordinary in his recent work. But consistent in much of his work is the dependence of his compositions on light, as it is the case in the series An Old Forest Road (2012-2013) featured in this exhibition. The sequene of black and white photographs printed by the artist depicts the privilege of walking through a little-visited reserve of forest near the photographers home in the American Northwest. Beyond the reserves there are miles of clearcuts. Adamss exquisite attentiveness to the sunlight piercing through a density of branches and leaves to reveal the hidden shapes and structure of the forest, and the shadows occluding the way forward, rendering it a portal to a destination unknown, brings out the subtle beauty of this simple wooded path. Especially when considering the series against the backdrop of Robert Adams’s oeuvre, these photographs offer a contemplative refuge of hope and affirmation in view of the radical transformation of the Western landscape brought about by human interference in nature. Since the early 1960s Robert Adams has explored the dialectic relationship of nature and civilization in his work. Alongside Lewis Baltz, Bernd and Hilla Becher and others, he participated in the seminal exhibition New Topographics: Photographs of a Man-Altered Landscape in 1975, which redefined landscape photography. His important series The New West from the 1980s addresses the myth of the American West and draws attention to the exploitation of the landscape and its limited resources. However, Adams still finds there a fragile beauty that endures despite our troubled relationship with nature. His photographs are distinguished not only by their aesthetic economy and lucidity, but also by their mixture of grief and hope.
Robert Adams received the Hasselblad Award and his works are in the collections of the Getty Museum in Los Angeles, the Yale University Art Gallery, the Whitney Museum in New York, the Art Institute Chicago, and the Sprengel Museum Hanover, among others. Adams’s work is accompanied by numerous artist’s books. The publication An Old Forest Road is published by Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther König and was produced in collaboration with Galerie Thomas Zander and Fraenkel Gallery, San Francisco.

