
In the last months, different key explanations have circulated to explain the retreat to right wing populism. If populism insinuates representation and diplomatic simplification of a matter, dangerous right wing politics seem to not be more prone to it than Hollywood cinema or Christmas shopping is. In fact many questions in politics prove to suggest simplified answers: How can I live? Work. How can I avoid causing harm to people, animals, plants? Impossible. What is greed? Nature.
However, less truculently than these examples, simplicity can offer a practical order of priorities, recently gaining popularity in circles that are not identified as the political right as such: sects are formed around The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying, drying out the swamp in the closet. The contemporary slogan of simplification, “I don’t have to think about it”, suggests that time will be spent to think about something MORE meaningful or relevant to the person. To claim that the ability to answer complicated questions with slogans is the reason why the far and close right has an inflow of visible support, does ring a bell. However it would be only interesting, if it includes the observation that simplicity is already at the core of capitalist marketing strategies.
“Holding the key” has always been a question connected to ownership, to owning the answers, the house, the solution. KnowNing. Whoever holds the key, can enter into the house, the apartment, the world of answers. Whoever holds the key is able to decode, to access what is inaccessible to others physically or metaphorically. The one who rings the doorbell, does NOT have the key. And doesn’t want to have it. If the door doesn’t open there is a window that can be broken or another doorbell can be rung. Doorbell pranks are a call to disruption: the keyowner walks to open the door in vain. The one with the key cannot prank the one without the key. A buzz at the door is an interruption, a foreboding of delivery or intrusion: the doorbell discontinues the insider’s dinner, TV time, his_her private retreat: International bells.
B.S.

