
There is a rainy season called tsuyu (plum rain) in Japan. It is said that the name tsuyu derived from plums that are ripening at the same time of the year. The rainy season is also called as baiu, which literally means “mold rain,” because it gets humid every day causing mold to grow fast. Furthermore, the rainy season is referred to as bairin (plum rain), samidare (rain of the fifth month), and baku-u (wheat rain).
A long spell of rain in the season would make us feel depressed sometimes, but it also makes hydrangeas bloom. Emotional ups and downs caused by persistent rain may make us feel sentiment in some respects.
****
Kenji Ide (b.1981) lives and works in Kanagawa. He has been featured in solo and group exhibitions internationally at institutions including : 2016 「After the summertime」 statement (Tokyo)「KIWAMARI art fes」Kiwamari-so (Ibaraki)「Unusualness Makes Sense」Chiang Mai University (Thailand) Rittai;at Art Center Ongoing (2015),Art and City in Yokohama and Taipei; at BankART NYK(2015), Nendo; at PAN coordinated by 98B, Manila (2014), and he run the artists event Super Open Studio as one of the organizer (it happen since 2013 around Sagamihara area). He ordinary deal mix media include video works, performance, or several materials with artworks. And this exhibition focus his veneer (plywood) sculptures which he used to make since his early career.
Yuki Kimura(b.1971) lives and works in Berlin. Completed graduate school of art at Kyoto City University of Arts. As the main solo exhibition in recent years, in 2016 Inhuman Transformation of New Years Decoration, Obsolete Conception or 2 CCA Watts Institute (San Francisco), 2015 THUS AND SO RATHER THAN OTHERWISE Taka Ishii Gallery (Tokyo), Harvest, Human Misery Mathew Gallery (Berlin). Kimura is also participating in many exhibitions both in Japan and abroad, and is currently exhibiting at 2017 CALIFORNIA PACIFIC TRIENNIAL OCMA (Los Angeles). Also, in 2016 Moved Taka Ishii Gallery (Tokyo), Adrift on Plastic Island Galerie Bernhard (Zurich), The Lasting Concept Portland Contemporary Art Association (Portland), 2015 Ocean of Images: New Photography 2015 Museum of Modern Art, New York (New York).※
2017 CALIFORNIA PACIFIC TRIENNIAL OCMA (Los Angeles) is being held until 3 September 2017.

