
Schinkel Pavillon is pleased to announce “Costumes &amp; Wishes for the 21st Century”, a collaboration between BLESS, visual artist Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster and interdisciplinary design Studio Manuel Raeder. The exhibition will open on October 30, 2016 in both Schinkel Pavillon’s main space and Schinkel Klause and will run through early 2017.
The exhibition at Schinkel Pavillon will feature a series of costumes which were part of Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster’s apparitions dating back to 2013, including Edgar Allan Poe, Lola Montez, and Fitzcarraldo among others. These costumes will be staged by Manuel Raeder to perpetuate the spirit of apparitions and transformations.
In addition, during the run of the exhibition, on ‘November Cosplay Sundays’ from 3–6pm, visitors will be invited to try on character t-shirts and accessories designed by BLESS and will also receive hairstyling by Hiro and makeup interpretations by “uslu airlines”. BLESS’s collection of ‘wearaways’ will offer visitors the opportunity to incorporate the characters and take their contemporary interpretations even further, off-site.
Costumes
“Clothes evolve from being canvases for moods, attitudes and psychological moments similar to rooms, spaces and dioramas; they turn into apparitions as characters become costumes. By twisted extension, this logic is taken to a new conclusion: clothes appear as costumes, narratives and fictions which mirror a fragmented and multiple inner self.” (Tristan Bera in Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster: 1887–2058, Prestel Verlag, 2016.)
Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster
Has in recent years staged a series of ‘apparitions’. The artist has appeared at designated times and places dressed up and made up to look like various characters, some fictional, some historical. The exhibition at Schinkel Pavillon features a series of costumes, from DGF’s M.2062 and QM.15, staged by Manuel Raeder so as to perpetuate the spirit of apparitions and transformations. Parallel to Costumes &amp; Wishes for the 21st Century, DGF will also have an exhibition, QM.15, at Esther Schipper in Berlin (4 November–17 December 2016).
Wearaways
Wearable fragments of a silhouette, designed by BLESS, inspired by the costumes worn by DGF in her apparitions. Provided for visitors in the ‘wardrobe’ in Schinkel Klause , to be self-experienced in the central ‘dressing room’. The Wearaways are acquirable on request.
BLESS
Based in Berlin and Paris. During the exhibition, BLESS Home Berlin at Oderbergerstraße 60 will be open Wednesday–Friday from 4–8pm, Saturdays from 11am–6pm, and always by appointment.
Stage
Designed by Manuel Raeder, conceived with DGF. Including a carpet in sections like the ‘cake table’ in the ‘wardrobe’ downstairs. There are also chairs, which visitors can sit on and which support the body in different ways. Some are blue, and some are black. Some have been affixed with casts of arms and legs.
Manuel Raeder
Runs an interdisciplinary design studio in Berlin, Studio Manuel Raeder, and the publishing house BOM DIA BOA TARDE BOA NOITE.

