
Manet, Hanneman, Mieris, Chardin, Michaelina Woutiers, Hans Heyerdahl, Rembrandt, they all painted young boys or putti blowing bubbles with a pipe or a straw. The bubbles often mingled with faded flowers or rotten fruit, cracked pottery, symbols of fame, snails, bugs, symbols of wealth, smoke. Occasionally the boys held the bubble in a sea shell, remnants of a once living creature. Tipped over glasses replaced the bubble here and there. In Jacques de Gheyn the Elder’s Vanitas Still Life from 1603 — an early homo bulla painting — different objects were floating in the bubble, or were reflected, such as a wheel of torture, a lepers rattle, a broken glass, a flaming heart. Bubbles were considered entertainment in the 18th century, they were seen as spectacular, they still are, like everted eyeballs.
– Matias Faldbakken
Matias Faldbakken (b. 1973, Hobro, Denmark) lives and works in Oslo. This is his sixth solo exhibition at the gallery. Current and recent solo exhibitions include “Effects of Good Government in the Pit”, Astrup Fearnley Museum, Oslo; House of Gaga // Reena Spaulings Fine Art, Los Angeles; Galerie Neu, Berlin; Le Mur, Paris; Galerie Eva Presenhuber, Zurich; Paula Cooper Gallery, New York; WIELS, Brussels; OCA Office for Contemporary Art, Oslo; Le Consortium, Dijon. Current and recent group exhibitions include “here / there / where”, FRAC Bourgogne, Burgundy; Gwangju Biennale, Gwangju; Yinchuan Biennale,Yinchuan; “Seeable/ Sayable”, Kunstnernes Hus, Oslo; “Collected by Thea Westreich Wagner and Ethan Wagner”, Centre Pompidou, Paris and Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; “Naturally Obscure”, Centre dArt Contemporain Passerelle, Brest; “Use/User/Used/”, Zabludowicz Collection, London; dOCUMENTA (13), Kassel. Faldbakkens most recent novel “The Hills” was published by Forlaget Oktober in September 2017.
STANDARD (OSLO) is also proud to announce that Matias Faldbakken opened a solo exhibition at the Astrup Fearnley Museum September 21st, 2017 which is up until January 28th, 2018.

