
For her first show at the gallery, Juliana Huxtable presents a new series of poster-sized prints mounted on sheet metal with DIY refrigerator magnets, along with a new video and a wall diagram. Tapping into the delirium of online conspiracy theories, trolling, rampant intersectionality, and the viral production of post-truth, Huxtable elaborates a digital info-shop aesthetic to map the productive chaos of contemporary identity politics. Transsexual and postgender activism, non-binary identification, YT skinhead culture, witchcraft, and the invisible toxicity of wifi microwaves, among many other mutant subcultural rumors and strains, all vie for attention in a paranoiac décor suggestive of a walk-in freezer. Here truthers, trolls, wiki warriors and bots propagate simultaneous and warring narratives while actively eroding any remaining belief in the “non-fiction world.”
In the video, a handful of kombucha drinking protesters marches through Bushwick chanting “No Trump, no KKK no fascist USA” while Huxtable narrates in an extreme, blue-lipsticked close-up. Theories about the legacy of rhythm as revolutionary communication within black activism and its theft by vanilla agendas trying and failing to chocolify post-Occupy protest, interweave with speculative fictions about alt-right control of New York nightlife. Panic shifts to diabolical laughter and back as info threads split off into further threads without end. Meanwhile, sci-fi, sex and magic are the weapons of choice for a conspiracy more virulently alive than any of its supposed authors.
Juliana Huxtable is an artist, poet, performer and DJ born in Bryan-College Station, Texas. She attended Bard College. Recent shows and performances include: The Grand Dold Projects Art Gala at Villa Jungans, Villingen, Germany; the 2015 Triennial: Surround Audience at the New Museum, New York; There Are Certain Facts that Cannot Be Disputed, at the Museum of Modern Art, New York and Take Ecstasy with Me at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. She also recently published Life with Hanna Black and will be launching her new book, Mucus in My Pineal Gland (Wonder/Capricious 2017) later this month.

