
This is an exhibition of new works by Swiss artist Gina Folly, marking her second solo show at the gallery, in the new space of Ermes-Ermes in Vienna.
Folly’s practice has focused on a multitude of cultural and social phenomena. Society, plants, animals, as well as everyday objects and situations play a vital role in her work.
I want you to live in my city presents a new body of work consisting of five video projections in cardboard boxes, and a series of keychain objects.
The cardboard boxes act as placeholders for an environment: a stand-in for the idea of a room, with four walls and a ceiling, a door with a lock for privacy, vents and filters for fresh air intake. Each keychain object holds a key to a corresponding lock on the cardboard boxes, for allowing or withholding access. These elements play with the idea of privacy, as in whom you want or not to share your space with, much as the filters hint at basic survivability (you cannot exist in a space without air). Moreover, the boxes act as on-the-go living spaces, instantly foldable and ready to move on to the next location, small portable autonomous vessels for living.
Inside the boxes, small snippets of captured beauty are projected and looped; sunlight bounces off a closing window, tiny fish perform grooming tasks, a Buddha statue mystifyingly looks on to passersby, and so on. Folly transfers these ecstatic daily glimpses from the corner of the eye to the mini projectors, creating ephemeral mnemonic capsules which keep shimmering in the makeshift domestic spaces.
Gina Folly (b. 1983) lives and works in Basel. Upcoming: solo show, Ginevra Gambino, Koln, April 2017. Selected solo exhibitions: in 2016 Domestic Problems, Almanac, London, UK; Gina Folly et Elle&amp;Antélio en conversation, Tunnel Tunnel, Lausanne, CH; Soon is now, SPREEZ, Munich, CH; in 2015 New Conditions, Ermes-Ermes, Rome, IT; Me You 2, with Lene Adler Petersen, Space Is The Place, Basel, CH; Ströme, with Mandla Reuter, S.A.L.T.S., Birsfelden, CH. Selected group shows: in 2016 Adrift on Plastic Island, Galerie Bernhard, Zurich, CH; Body pt. 1 (zombie), Ginevra Gambino, Cologne, D; L’etat parfait, Freymond-Guth Fine Arts, Basel, CH; A MYSTICAL STAIRCASE, curated by Francesco Urbano Ragazzi for 63rd77thspeps.com; Some of My Best Friends Are Germs, Le Doc, Paris, FR; The Free Design, Art Bärtschi &amp; Cie, Geneve, CH. Since 2013 running the artist space ‘Taylor Macklin’ in Zurich together with Selina Grüter and Michèle
Graf.

