
It is not just two generations that stand beside one another in the duo exhibition of Inge Mahn and Nora Schultz, but also two sculptural positions.
By posing her abstracted, scaled and extensive sculptures in relation to one another, Inge Mahn’s works condense the essence of objects. Move and rest, weightiness and levity as well as the structures of Villa Salve Hospes’s space are visualized in the different constellations of objects and , underscored by temporary architectural interventions.
In her Centre Dental series, Nora Schultz turns to the dematerialization and activation of sculptures. Filmed with drone cameras and moved by hidden performers, the haptic quality of the sculptures recedes into the background in service of the overall appearance of the film, allowing the sculptures to become temporary actors in the film. Sequentiality and setting are decisive for this body of work, which has been reconstituted in the space of the Kunstverein’s evolving installation.
Inge Mahn (*1943) lives and works in Berlin and Groß Fredenwalde. She studied at the Düsseldorfer Akademie, where she completed a Masters degree under Joseph Beuys in 1970. After teaching as a (visiting) professor at the Hochschule für Bildende Künste Braunschweig and the Staatliche Akademie der Künste Stuttgart, she taught at the Kunsthochschule Berlin-Weißensee until 2009. In addition to her participation in documenta 5 (1972), more recent solo exhibitions at the artist’s spaces in K21, Dusseldorf (2017), at Cahiers d’art, Paris (2015) and in the Akademie Galerie — Die Neue Sampling, Düsseldorf (2014/15) have been dedicated to Ingea Mahn’s work.
Nora Schultz (*1975) lives and works in Boston. She studied from 1998 to 2005 at the Staatliche Hochschule für Bildende Künste — Städelschule in Frankfurt am Main. Along with her participation in Skulptur Projekte 2017 in Münster her works have been shown in numerous solo exhibitions, including at the Kadist Art Foundation, Paris (2016), at the Renaissance Society, Chicago (2014) and at Portikus, Frankfurt am Main (2012). Nora Schultz is an assistant professor of visual and environmental studies at Harvard University.

