
Hikaru Suzuki’s video artwork, in which reality and fiction constantly interact, is based on his self-documentary which is shot in places such as Fukushima prefecture, where he was born and raised, and Berlin, where he currently resides. The video depicts the lives of his close friends and families while these private images are designed to communicate with each other. In many cases, Suzuki’s artwork inscribes truth and falsehood concerning narrative by use of repetition of shots from different viewpoints and of interviews, such as “Mr. S &amp; Doraemon” (2012). The video is played in a way everyday scenes shot like a diary are rewound to the day of the Great East Japan Earthquake, March 11, while connected with fragments from the animated TV series “Doraemon.” Another example is “GOD AND FATHER AND ME” (2008), a family portrait which depicts the relationship between an artist and his father who is a person of religion.
In this exhibition entitled “MONTAGE,” his new artwork “October” (2018) will be on display. In contrast to his previous work, this artwork was created without employing a clear narrative and social issues. Multiple viewpoints such as Berlin, the city where the artist resides, the sea in Hamburg, heavy trucks, and portraits of people from various races are intermingled, and characterized by long takes and unassuming shots of everyday scenes. This artwork reveals a new aspect of Hikaru Suzuki while incorporating his influence from Berlin through methods of documentary film such as fixed camerawork suggestive of photography, lyrical approach to capture everyday scenes, and keen observation which aims to see through to what is behind reality.
Hikaru Suzuki was born in Fukushima in 1984. Suzuki has been invited to renowned festivals such as ART AWARD TOKYO 2008, Media Art Film Festival in Tokyo, the Yamagata International Documentary Film Festival, Yebisu International Festival for Art &amp; Alternative Visions 2015, image forum 2017, HAU Hebbel am Ufer in Berlin and WRO art center in Wroclaw, Poland etc. Lives and works in Berlin.

