
Anglim Gilbert Gallery is pleased to announce a solo presentation of works from 1962 to present
by maverick, new media artist Lynn Hershman Leeson. The exhibition will feature recently
rediscovered early works from Hershman Leeson’s studio, most never before exhibited. Presaging
innovations in her later work, these drawings, collages, and electronic sculptures introduced
themes carried through five decades.
Lynn Hershman Leeson has examined the defining elements of human identity as it evolved
from the societal upheaval of the ‘60s and ‘70s. From a feminist point of view, Hershman Leeson
created and performed works that illuminated a changing environment influenced by television,
advertising, and new media. One of the first artists to utilize video and advancing computer
technology, she has consistently engaged machines and new technologies as both her artistic
medium of choice and as imagery for changing human identity. For over 50 years Hershman
Leeson has steadily produced groundbreaking, interactive artworks and “virtual” identities.
Lynn Hershman Leeson will have a solo exhibition at Haus der Elektronischen Künste (HeK) in
Basel, Switzerland from May 3 August 5, 2018 and two of her films will screen at Art Basel on
June 13 and 14, 2018. Her retrospective exhibition CIVIC RADAR, organized and produced in 2014
by the ZKM (Center for New Media Art), Karlsruhe, Germany, acknowledged her contribution to
the global new media arts community and was enthusiastically received as it evolved into other
museum presentations including Modern Art Oxford, the Lehmbruck Museum, and the
Deichtorhallen Hamburg/Sammlung Falckenberg. Providing an overview of her pioneering work in
video, film, and web-based art, the exhibitions earned wide critical acclaim and spurred accessions
by international museums.
Hershman Leeson is featured in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and Tate Modern, among others. She
was the recipient of a Siggraph Lifetime Achievement Award, Prix Ars Electronica Golden Nica,
and a John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation Fellowship. In 2017 she received a USA
Artist Fellowship and the San Francisco Film Society’s “Persistence of Vision” award. In February
2018 she was awarded the College Art Association’s “Distinguished Feminist Award” and the
National Women’s Caucus for Art “Lifetime Achievement Award.”

