

Central to the work of Cédric Eisenring is the issue of narrative. He examines the narrative potential of artistic media such as printmaking, drawing, sculpture and installation. In the process, he frequently draws on existing storylines from film, literature, comics or children’s books and weaves them into new fictional and visual narratives. History and present, fictitious and real space interleave in his works as a result of their particular presentation in the exhibition space.
Cédric Eisenring’s works on paper are created in elaborate, multi-step processes. He employs classical printing techniques such as photogravure and drypoint, generates the source images from computer drawings or reworks the prints with pencil and crayon. This results in collage-like pictorial inventions in which familiar and less familiar visual references appear and figures, forms and landscapes overlap. The fairy tale-like, fanciful quality of the images is further underscored by the manner in which they are presented. Eisenring displays the prints in boxes, cordoned off or «protected» by a canopy of sorts. These surprising modes of presentation blur the boundaries between the fictitious space of the image and the actual space in which the works are displayed. The artist pursues a similar approach in his architectural interventions which similarly create fictionalised spaces by breaking the patterns of neutral presentation in the white cube.
A Commitment to the Young Swiss Art Scene



One of the most important advancement awards for contemporary art in our country, the Manor Art Award was established in 1982 by Philippe Nordmann to offer a platform for young Swiss artists. It is awarded annually by a jury of experts in six Swiss cities, with Aarau, Basel, Biel, Chur, Geneva, Lausanne, Lucerne, Lugano, Schaffhausen, Sion, St. Gallen and Winterthur taking turns every two years. A look at the list of award recipients reveals that the Manor Art Award has contributed to the international breakthrough of a whole slew of artists, including Luciano Castelli (1984 Art Award Lucerne), Marie José Burki (1993 Art Award Geneva), Pipilotti Rist (1994 Art Award St. Gallen) and Lena Maria Thüring (2013 Art Award Basel).



