
Parker Gallery is pleased to present a solo exhibition of new work by Hannah Greely. This is the artist’s first solo gallery presentation in Los Angeles and her first with Parker Gallery.
The exhibition includes six sculptural works, whose subjects include but are not limited to: a dog, a picnic, soccer, a raffle, and love. Greely’s constructions are handmade and humble; made of cardboard, gypsum cement and tempera paint. Inspired by the efficiency of a doodle or sketch, Greely makes three dimensional work that is animated with the idiosyncrasies of drawing. An ominous commingling of humor and horror intensifies the communication breakdown of pictorial space.
A larger-than-life-size still-life, The Picnic (all works 2017), presents a sunny pastoral scene set atop a grass hillock. Reaching out from under an umbrella is a man’s arm sleeved in a striped shirt. His hand is being bit by a gigantic red ant. Scattered across the picnic blanket is a long watermelon, a wine bottle, and a miniature female figure; hollow ghosts in this haunted tableau. Through radical shifts in scale, Greely alludes to a suspended narrative occurring between the objects.
L-O-V-E explores figurative language, with the letters personified as a family unit; letters making language. Greely turns language into legible sculpture, allowing us to read physical form. Each letter casts a shadow of itself, a perpetual reminder of their eternal roles as letters in our alphabet.
In Life Raffle, an over-sized raffle cage teems with colorful plush toys representing various milestones and aspirations of a well-lived life. Greely has selected some hackneyed benchmarks of success for the plush toy treatment, including wealth, marriage and a sports car. Equating dreams and desires to the luck of the draw may reflect a general malaise festering beneath this new body of work. Greely’s work oscillates between anxiety and jubilation while casting a sideways glance at the world.
Hannah Greely (b. 1979 in Dickson, TN) lives and works in Los Angeles, CA. Greely has had solo exhibitions at galleries including Andrea Rosen Gallery in New York and Bob Van Orsouw Gallery in Zurich. Greely has been included in group exhibitions at numerous museums, including the Astrup-Fearnley Museet in Oslo, the Whitney Museum in New York, Serpentine Galleries in London, UCLA Hammer Museum in Los Angeles, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and The Rubell Family Collection in Miami.

