
Moran Bondaroff is pleased to announce When you look in eyes you can only look into one at a time, unless you’re further away and aligned perfectly with mirrored feature spacing on view from November 18 through January 6, 2018. The exhibition features new paintings by Torey Thornton. This will be our second exhibition with the artist since he joined the gallery in 2013.
What does air look like, baby oil in water, I don’t own any Burberry but the fabric, when cropped, either becomes hard edge abstraction or a monochrome, your choice, their choice, depending on how deep the cut. No matter how it’s rendered: the viewer as master of the Painting.
A Cotton on a stick, to the Merci sheets that are always a forgotten purchase, to the many selvedge denims touching new balances; It all comes from one home.
All things on a spectrum and sliding around in relation and context, a Subaru Baja next to any Tesla , a Tesla next to a Tank. Rough to smooth, slow versus fast, big, small. Touch. The subsections and spectrums, even Painting as obviously non-binary.
Push into paint, painting, then push outside of paint for fear of boredom, as Japanese walls aren’t always 90 degrees. Brains grow less smooth this way. – Torey Thornton
Torey Thornton (b. 1990, Macon, GA) lives and works in Brooklyn, NY. He graduated from Cooper Union in 2012. His work has shown nationally and abroad, including solo exhibitions at Albright–Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, NY; Stuart Shave/Modern Art, London, UK; Shane Campbell, Chicago, IL; and Karma, New York, NY. Recent group exhibitions include: Whitney Biennial 2017, Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, NY; Living Apart Together: Recent Acquisitions from the Hammer Contemporary Collection, Hammer Museum, Los Angeles, CA; and Third Space/Shifting Conversations About Contemporary Art, Birmingham Museum of Art, Birmingham, AL. Thornton’s work is in the permanent collection of Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, NY; Birmingham Museum of Art, Birmingham, AL; Dallas Museum of Art, Dallas, TX; Hammer Museum, Los Angeles, CA; Nasher Museum of Art at Duke University, Durham, NC; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, NY; University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, NY.

